<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-8</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-8" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter III</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-3" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor002"></a>The Appeal of Mysticism</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">M</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">ysticism will appeal </span>to all who look beyond what is self-evident and perceived through the physical senses. References to mysticism have been made by various outstanding writers - contemporary as well as those in the past - in the fields of science and philosophy. Some have been in favor of its principles; others tried to substantiate a case against it. Still others, of course, refused to consider the subject matter of mysticism or to take its phenomena seriously. To them, mysticism is nothing more than an adolescent phenomenon or condition attracting only the nervously disordered, emotionally unstable, or even the mentally abnormal individual. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">One writer stated in effect that when life becomes too complicated, or unsurmountable problems face an individual, it is easy for the unbalanced personality to take refuge from the problems of actual environment by turning to the field of mysticism or to speculative philosophies and trying to exist as a personality free from the problems and obstacles which are faced in the actual environment. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Consideration of these points of view raises the following questions: What is mysticism? Is mysticism an escape mechanism? What is the relation of intelligence to mystical experience? What are the findings and ultimate ends of mysticism? </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">As background, we must be aware that the viewpoint of a materialistic science cannot be the final judgment on the subject. If one’s viewpoint on all phenomena is based purely upon objective proof and upon the foundation of belief in a mechanistic universe and a materialistic philosophy, there is little by which the individual can judge the true merits of anything which falls into the classification of idealistic philosophy or subjective phenomena. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Few individuals are capable of passing upon the validity of all knowledge. Many fields of study have their specialization. Doctors, for example, specialize in various fields, including the limiting of their practice to certain organs of the body. We would not have complete confidence in a veterinarian, however skillful, to make a diagnosis and prescribe treatment for human ills. Regardless of how skilled or how efficient an individual is in his own field it will not necessarily qualify that person in another area. We would not call a plumber, for example, to repair a valuable electronic instrument. These may seem extreme illustrations, but they nevertheless illustrate that what we are capable of doing is the area in which we have learned to do by acquisition of knowledge, coupled with experience within the scope of the subject matter with which we are involved. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">To the materialist, the phenomena of mysticism lie outside his experience because he refuses to recognize as valid any knowledge or any proof of phenomena which do not make themselves self-evident to the physical senses. Therefore, when the materialistic philosopher or scientist refuses to admit the value of a mystical philosophy, he is honestly basing his decision upon his own experience, which has entirely closed the field of idealistic philosophy to him. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This is not a question of right or wrong. Materialistic science has great achievements to its credit, but as Rosicrucians recognize, there is value in both the objective and subjective fields of phenomena. Tolerance should be the guidance on the part of those who have not interested themselves to the extent of learning whether or not there is validity in mystical experience or other subjective phenomena. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A definition of mysticism has already been given, but we will from time to time reconsider mysticism in terms of definition. Briefly, to repeat, it is considered to be a process by which the knowledge of the absolute, or the universal, and truth is obtainable through intuition or insight in a manner differing from ordinary physical sense perception. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Mysticism does not deny the existence of a materialistic world, but it states that we may see beyond the material world, that there is in existence knowledge and good which can be conceived by a human being and which makes him a living creature, thereby different from other material objects. The human being is able to maintain a connecting link with the source of this life force, which we conceive is a phase of an absolute or universal force. As the result of the mystic’s concept that this life force flows through the universe, it is presumed and has been proven to the satisfaction of those who have investigated this phenomenon that we are able to contact an ultimate and fundamental source of knowledge and good through the channel of intuition and insight. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It is not important to define the actual state and manifestation this knowledge takes, nor does it make any difference in regard to our personal beliefs concerning the existence of a supreme being. Mysticism is concerned only with the principle that regardless of what this fundamental reality or original source of the universe may be, we are a part of it and are able to direct our thoughts to it and with it. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The next question concerns whether mysticism is a doctrine worthy of our consideration or whether it is only a means of escape from the problems of living. It was mentioned that some materialists saw it as a principle or concept to which the unbalanced mind or immature individual could turn in order to escape from being bound by the realities and stress of environment. It is true that there are those who do try to find in some types of mystical teaching a means of avoiding their responsibilities. The answer to such critics is that mysticism can be one of a number of means of escape used by those who have neither the fortitude nor the ability to face environmental adjustment. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Commonly known escape mechanisms are found in such simple devices as giving all attention to pleasure rather than to responsibility. There are actually many people, more than we might ordinarily presume, who use various forms of pleasure as a means of escape. Those who project themselves into a novel or its presentation as a motion picture or television program are trying to create a different life from the one that they actually lead. They project themselves into the circumstances that are imaginary and find an escape from their individual responsibilities for a few hours.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The use of an escape mechanism becomes more extreme and more serious to well-being when people resort to the use of drugs as an escape from reality. Habitual drunkards or drug addicts are doing little more than doping their physical being with a drug to keep from being conscious of the realities which they must face when they are sober or when their minds are clear. Even tobacco, in a lesser sense, is also an escape mechanism for those who use it as a momentary interruption of the reality of a situation about them and a means of relaxing or directing their attention toward something else. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In fact, we all may use escape mechanisms at one or another time during our life. Some may be harmful to health and others not. From time to time the individual turns to something different from the realities of life, and this can be a normal procedure. Danger lies with the individual who commits himself to something outside of reality, who actually reverses his personality and makes the escape mechanism result in serious personal disturbances or disorders, be it liquor, drugs, or anything else. The choice makes no difference insofar as the results are concerned. The use of anything as an escape mechanism does not condemn its use for a more worthwhile purpose under other circumstances. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Another criticism of mysticism concerns the degree of intelligence of an individual with mystical experience. Extreme materialists infer that the mystical experience is accompanied either by low intelligence or illiteracy. There is an old saying that ignorance is bliss, that the less we know the easier it is for us to live contentedly, because we are shutting out a part of the realities of which we should become aware. On the other hand, there have been illustrations of the fact that the lack of knowledge has made individuals capable of receiving mystical insight, which has been a means of bringing knowledge and hope to others. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This is beautifully illustrated in the novel The Song of Bernadette. The heroine of this story was looked upon as possessing little intelligence by the other inhabitants of her native village. She was the only one who could drop the artificiality and the inhibitions that blinded the others to the vision that she alone could see. If those who looked down upon her lack of intelligence had been able to take from their eyes the very parts of their biased beliefs that had hindered them from seeing beyond the physical realities about them, they could also have experienced the ecstasy that was hers alone.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">However, merely because some have had glimpses into the world beyond physical phenomena whom we in our rather smug capacity of judging would claim to be ignorant, it certainly does not mean that only the ignorant have experienced the reality of mystical phenomena. If we go back through history and examine the great philosophers and religious leaders and others who have contributed to the thought and welfare of mankind, we will find those who had the best of all instruction available in their era of history, as well as those whose inspiration was apparently all of their education. Here again we see that mystical phenomena are not disposed to favor either the wise or the ignorant, the poor or the wealthy, the perfectly adjusted individual or the maladjusted personality.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">To those who have personally experienced the meaning of mysticism, it is a phenomenon and a reality, just as real and existent as anything that can be perceived with the physical senses. Furthermore, just as the wise or ignorant, or rich or poor, can behold both beauty and evil, so can they perceive with their inner senses beyond the physical world and gain a knowledge which is ordinarily called unknown. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Finally, we must be able to point to the findings and the ultimate purposes of mysticism. In all things, whether it be a system of ideas or the physical proofs of science, the final accomplishments, ends, or the proofs of the usefulness or validity of the process or system of thought are the ultimate test of value. It might seem impossible for us to analyze the ends to which the various mystics have arrived in a few significant points. Mystics living in ancient and modern times and in different places have had experiences in terms of their own understanding and interpretation. If we assemble all the facts and the essence of the teachings lived by these individuals as they affected those about them, we find that these individuals have all upheld a few fundamental principles with which they have been in complete agreement, as have investigators in various fields of scientific endeavor. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The following are the conclusions to which the mystics generally agree. The greatest who have lived have contributed to these principles. First, the universe is a manifestation of a unity, and therefore all apparent existing separation or states of differences, such as those which exist between mind and body, between one mind and another, between life and its source, between appearance and reality, are all illusory. Second, evil, although it is related to the physical world, is not the reality that it seems to be, but is in fact an illusion which exists in the finite minds of men because of their ability to view only a part of the whole Cosmic scheme. Third, time is only an illusion, a concept of the objective mind. All that is real is eternal and exists outside of time. Fourth, the true and fundamental reality of all things is based upon the existence of a universal, Cosmic Consciousness which embraces the Absolute and all things which have been brought into existence and constitutes the Cosmic. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The mystics may disagree as to whether this ultimate, supreme consciousness is personal or impersonal, but that it is an all-pervading force throughout the universe is generally agreed. In these four principles we see that mystics have offered a solution to some of the fundamental problems of philosophy and of our existence. It is true that the mere fact that the majority of mystics uphold these ideals and arrive at these conclusions is not proof of their validity, but even the most severe critics of mysticism can hardly deny the sincerity of many who have contributed to these thoughts. It is not possible for us to claim these conclusions as entirely without evidence or support of our contentions. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In mysticism we are dealing with truths that lie beyond the realm of finite reason. The characteristic feature of knowledge with which we are daily concerned presupposes that there will be both a knower and that which becomes known. The former is separated from the latter. If I hold a pen in my hand, I am fully aware that the pen is one thing and I am another. There exists no relation between the two other than the use being made of the pen at the moment. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Knowledge which is mystical reaches across the gulf which separates the knower from the known. When the soul truly becomes conscious of an experience which is of a universal force or of a fundamental reality, the soul ceases to be a separate entity from the Absolute or the entire Cosmic scheme. The thing known and a condition of oneness is achieved where the knower, that is, the self or soul becomes one with a universal unity. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">From the point of view of the mystic, the soul is ever striving to reunite itself with the fundamental reality of which it is a part, and in so reaching out to contact this force, which it may know as the Absolute, or as God, the emotional responses of reverence and love are brought into manifestation. As in the experience of earthly love, the self feels a state of Attunement and oneness with the Absolute, that is, the beloved. So it is that the relation of mankind to mystical phenomena and truth is never purely intellectual and separate from the thing known but is always a part of and related to the actual experience which comes to be the prime motivating force in the life of the mystic. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
