<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-18</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-18" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">CHAPTER XIII</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-13" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor012"></a>Mysticism as a Metaphysical Solution</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">M</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">etaphysics has always </span>been faced with the task of determining the nature of ultimate reality and with finding the answer to the question, “What is real?” Man in his early thinking, as nearly as we have a record of it, gave a great deal of time and thought to finding a fundamental reality that is the basis of all things. The early Greek philosophers, for example, specified air, water, fire, and other physical phenomena as being the underlying or fundamental reality. While they were able to formulate philosophies that were of interest and were at least the beginning of metaphysical speculation, they found that their theories were inadequate in the end. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It is true that materialism in philosophy has had value. It has led to the foundation of modern sciences. It has made it possible for man to delve into the mysteries of the universe, to find explanation for the laws of nature, and to be able to deal with material phenomena, including the body of man himself. As has been frequently repeated, we would not be in as good a condition, nor would we probably be as content as we are today, if it were not for the outstanding achievements of scientific inquiry and development. Thus we see the importance of man’s thought. Men and women devoted themselves to thinking of their place in the universe and of the nature of that universe. In their at tempt to arrive at the central core of it, the fundamental reality underlying all else, they developed systems of thought that contributed to man’s welfare down through the ages. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Materialism, as I have outlined, has contributed to the development and evolvement of science. Those who did not accept materialism, and instead, developed idealism, whose outstanding spokesman among the early Greek Philosophers was Plato, laid the foundation for the further development of speculative philosophy, metaphysics, religion, and, most important in our consideration, mysticism. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The historic development of philosophy in all of its phases has been to determine the nature of reality. Man has always sought the answer to this question. No one has objectively reached any final analysis or final answer, but metaphysics has moved in the proper direction. With all the faults that we can find with the social, political, economic and religious concepts that exist today, as well as finding faults with the application of science, we must acknowledge that man has evolved, that he is better off materially than he has been at other times in history. If man will lead a balanced life, if he will balance his thinking between materialism and idealism and accept the fact that both have merit, that both have validity, man can continue to evolve. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Needed most of all is the application of idealism. Man has neglected idealism because he has spent so much time in the development of the material world. In order to develop idealism in the world today, man must first of all acknowledge that materialism is not the final reality, not the final answer to the question that metaphysics has asked down through the corridors of time. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Idealism has not proven itself to some to be the final answer, either, but it has not had the opportunity that materialism has had, because materialism has been emphasized while idealism has frequently been subordinated. Generally speaking, the concepts of idealism have been left primarily to the realm of religion. Frequently, man has paid only a certain amount of attention to religion. He has acknowledged it; he says that it is good, and he may nominally subscribe to some of its principles, but it has not had the dynamic force that materialism has developed. Therefore, idealism has been in second place, as it were, throughout much of the history of man’s thought. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">How, we might ask, can the principles of idealism be brought into focus and made to be an important factor in the life of mankind? I believe that mysticism is the key. Through mysticism we can place our emphasis not alone upon the working of the brain and the perception of the physical senses, but we can look into ourselves, look into the world that is sustained by the universal force that causes the entire universe to be, whether material or non-material. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In fact, the mystical experience is the only channel by which we can contact any force of a non-material nature. The mystical experience leads us directly into an area where the ideals, the concepts that are non material, become stable and as realistic to the individual as does any material object perceived through the senses. In that way, we can bring to the surface of consciousness an awareness of the phase of the universe that is not physical and balance it with that which we know of the material. Only by an eventual balance and harmonious relationship existing between materialism and idealism will we ever be able to reach a complete understanding of the nature of the universe and the nature of the individuals who populate it.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Mysticism, therefore, offers the solution to the problem of metaphysics. It is the means of arriving at not only an understanding of what constitutes reality but of being placed in touch with this reality in such a way that it can be brought into manifestation and can function as a dynamic principle. We can work with it just as we have with that which lies within the realm of materialistic metaphysics. To solve the metaphysical question is to lead man one step nearer to his ultimate goal, that is, a realization of his purpose and his true place in a total universe. We acknowledge our existence but fail to acknowledge the complete relationship that existence has to all other things, both material and non-material.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In order to gain a better understanding of the relationship between our lives as they are now and a practical application of idealism, we might summarize some of the principles of mysticism that can contribute to making it possible for man to realize the ideals as set forth by Plato.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Plato conceived that the ideal was the ultimate reality, that for everything in existence there was a perfect form whose idea preceded it. For example, man cannot conceive anything perfect. He can conceive a triangle, but the triangle that man conceives is only a rudimentary copy of the ultimate, perfect triangle that is the ideal triangle. It lies outside the scope or area of the material manifestation. Everything we conceive, therefore, is a poor duplicate of what perfectly exists in an area beyond our objective realization. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The principles of mysticism that will contribute to putting into practical application the principles of idealism might be summarized in this form: First, mysticism considers that the ultimate reality is one, that the basis of the world is monistic. There is one fundamental reality that lies at the source and constitutes the beginning and maintenance of the universe as a whole. The monistic concept is one that can be accepted by the mystic because his experience causes him to reach the conclusion that the one reality of the universe is the final reality and can be attained by the individual. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The second criterion is that mysticism considers the balance and harmony in the universe and that there is a materialistic universe in which man is made to experience the process known as life. The physical things that constitute the material universe exist prior to our knowledge of them. That is, the mystic is not a dreamer. He does not believe that all is within the mind. He usually accepts objective idealism and considers the fact that there is a world with which he must deal and with which he must contend. He also acknowledges that his physical body is a part of that world and that he must learn to use it and take care of it.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Third, mysticism teaches that the universe is purposeful. Its creator, the force that caused it to be, expressed a meaningful idea. That meaning lies within the area of unanswered metaphysical questions. Mystics have reported that they have seen the answers to these questions, that they have understood that the universe has purpose, and that the force behind it was purposeful and is directing the universe toward an end conceived within the process of its creation. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We can only take their word that they have had such experiences. In every case they have found what they experienced was ineffable. They were unable to put into words the concepts which constituted the mystical experience. This is a point which the agnostic points out as an argument against the validity of the mystical experience, saying that nothing concrete or worthwhile comes out of it, yet the assurance on the part of the individual who had such an experience has influenced the course of history. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Fourth, mystics maintain that the intelligibility of the universe indicates that its nature is continuous with the nature of the mind. The mind of man is a part of the function of the universe and will be in a harmonious relationship with the other universal forces if we permit it to be. The continuous manifestation of the universe contributes to the progress that man can make by his cooperation with the forces that lie back of these manifestations and through the mystical experience he can harmonize himself with that force. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Fifth, the mystic maintains that what we think the world to actually be is determined by the nature of the world and not by the nature of the knowing mind. Again, this is a reiteration that the universe exists as a whole and has a beginning and a purposeful continuance. It is not something conceived in the mind of man, nor can it be manipulated to its fullest extent by the mind of man. The force that causes it to exist and to be created in the first place is a force that transcends any human capability. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
