<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-5</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-5" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div id="_idContainer006" class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header"><span class="CharOverride-3">INTRODUCTION </span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">M</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">ysticism is a </span>discipline which merits consideration of all individuals today. Although most of the material that is accessible on the subject deals with biography or history and is treated primarily in the past tense, its-potentialities and challenges raise interesting questions. Is there a future for mysticism? Can it help the individual today to adjust better to the circumstances about him? Can it make for a better future for humanity?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The teachings of mystics who have lived in the past are vital for our understanding of the subject, but even more important is what we can do with the knowledge of mysticism if we acquire it. What can mysticism do for us?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I have made an attempt to analyze the meaning of mysticism, not only in historical perspective from the experiences related by those who have mastered the subject but also as an overlooked subject that could be utilized in the future in a manner that can completely reorient our thinking both in our present-day living and in the centuries to come. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I am unable to trace the beginnings of my interest in mysticism. It would seem as if I have been interested in it most of my life. This interest has been influenced by the study of philosophy and related subjects. Any subject, of course, requires knowledge of its history, and the writings of recognized mystics are now our heritage. I have studied many of these sources and, as a result, have developed an outlook upon life and its circumstances that reflects a concept of mysticism and places emphasis upon its importance. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">To go so far as to predict the eventual application of mysticism to the daily living of every individual is of course to take a somewhat drastic step, but I believe it is a step in the right direction. If my conclusions challenge individuals to think in this field, there may develop a means of arriving at solutions to our social, economic,and political problems that has not been exhausted or even given a fair trial in the past. Many will say that this is my personal opinion, and that it is speculative. With these conclusions I will agree, but nevertheless proceed to offer the ideas which I have decided are worthy of consideration. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">My background in the subject I owe to two principal sources other than my study of the writings of some of the outstanding mystics of the past. My interest in mysticism first attracted me to the Rosicrucian Order, AMORC. In its philosophy and teachings I found the foundation upon which I have built my own interpretation and understanding of mysticism. The Rosicrucians base their philosophy upon a mystical concept. A conscientious study of their teachings will lead an individual to realize the importance of mysticism and to methods of application. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Another source, which I consider to be one of the outstanding modern treatments of mysticism, is Mysticism and Philosophy, by the British philosopher Dr. W. T. Stacey. His profound and analytical study of the subject is an inspiration to any who have the philosophical background and the interest in mysticism sufficient to analyze the intricacies and ideas which Dr. Stacey presents. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Although I have drawn freely on both of the above sources, my opinions are not a duplication of these sources or any other. I assume the responsibility for the opinions expressed in the following pages. They are in the final analysis the conclusions reached by my own study. Nevertheless, in many of the ideas expressed here, I reflect the principles and concepts contained in Rosicrucian philosophy and stated by Dr. Stacey. I have freely referred to him in the pages that follow. I have also used some of the identical quotations which he used to illustrate certain concepts of well-known mystics. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If any of the ideas here expressed will guide someone to give consideration to the vast scope of the subject of mysticism and to consider my proposal of the future potentiality that lies in the use of mysticism, then this work will be worthwhile and my purpose will have been fulfilled. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I again wish to acknowledge the assistance of Mrs. Louise A. Vernon, who has edited most of my writings-over a period of many years. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph ParaOverride-2">Cecil A. Poole</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Sunnyvale, California</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">December 5, 1981</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
