<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-15</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-15" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter X</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-10" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor009"></a>Reason and Experience</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">I</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">n our day-to-day </span>living, reasoning is primarily an objective process. We put into words the content of consciousness, that is, the things we are thinking about. Particularly, we use the thinking process in order to arrive at a decision based upon the knowledge and experience that we have available in our conscious mind. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Reasoning is associated with the phase of philosophy known as logic. Logic is a complicated subject, far beyond the scope of our consideration here except to consider some of its elementary aspects. One of the tools used in a logical process is inference, a process of putting two judgments together in such a way that a third judgment is formed. Out of this reasoning process a new truth arises, which constitutes a conclusion, the ultimate purpose of all reason. We follow a process of reasoning in order to arrive at a decision or conclusion. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The judgments which we make are associated with each other in such a way that the final judgment becomes identical with the conclusion. The process is known as a syllogism. A famous syllogism is All men are mortal. Socrates is a man; therefore, Socrates is mortal. This syllogism represents the three steps or judgments made up of a major premise, a minor premise, and the conclusion. The first or major premise states a general principle. The minor premise takes into consideration the general principle by applying it to a particular case. The conclusion states what we might consider to be a new truth or a new discovery. This is the syllogism of deductive logic.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Inductive logic does not have any special form of inferences. What is most interesting in connection with a syllogism is that it actually does not represent the manner in which most conclusions are reached in our thinking processes. The aspect that seems most important to us is the conclusion. We do not go through the formal steps as outlined by a syllogism of logic. We might say that the syllogism of deductive logic is used only as a means of testing the truth or falsity of a conclusion that has been reached after it has been made. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Logic deals with proofs, not the mental processes that are involved in making inferences. Logic is therefore interested in arranging facts into ideal systems, in showing what may be the necessary relationship which exists between those systems, and in providing methods of combining them for the purpose of testing the validity of our conclusions. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">When we examine the reasoning process to find out how these conclusions actually arise, we find that they frequently arise mainly by laws of association. If I see water and I am thirsty, I say to myself, “I can drink the water and satisfy my thirst.” I have come to a conclusion immediately as the result of the perception of the existence of water. The content of my thought is linked with the idea of water, and that determines the inference that leads to the conclusion. Naturally, such a process is reached as the result of the experiences, the information, my temperament, the interests and purposes that I have had that make it possible for me to have this association of ideas. In this sense, association by similarity is most important in reasoning. We put together the things with which we are familiar in such a way that they lead to the conclusion we are seeking. If we are correct in arriving at a conclusion, we have used the reasoning process to discriminate and properly evaluate the elements of whatever has been presented to our senses. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the analysis of mystical literature, we do not find a great deal of reference to logic, and very little to reasoning. It has been stated by many who have studied mysticism and by those who have been mystics that mysticism is above reason. In using the word above in this sense, it would appear that the world of the mystic, of his thinking, is of a higher nature than that which we receive through our normal sense experience. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The mystic does not reason himself into a mystical experience. In fact, he could not do so if he wanted to. The mystical experience lies above reason. Therefore, as it lies above it, it lies outside of it. Reason and mysticism are almost opposites in that they are associated only in the sense that we may use inferences that come to mind after the mystical experience itself. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This does not mean that when the mystic claims that his revelation or experience is outside reason it is outside the sphere of being reasonable. The mystic will urge, if he has an opportunity and is so disposed, that in the end the mystical life is the only reasonable life that a man should live, and that men were born to become mystics. In mysticism the proponent of this concept will uphold the idea as one of the purposes of life. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A basic reason why the relationship of reason and mysticism is not close is due to the paradoxicality of many of the mystical experiences. If we consider the reports that individuals have made about these experiences, we often find an inability of the mystic to express his mystical experience or revelation in words. The mystical experience is fundamentally ineffable. As a result, we rapidly move away from the concept of reasoning and logic as normally considered by the objective consideration given to these subjects by those concerned with the process of reasoning. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We can easily review some of the paradoxes. In the pantheistic paradox, God and the world are both identical and nonidentical. The universal mind is both qualified and unqualified, both personal and impersonal, both static and dynamic. There is also the paradox that the I or ego ceases to be individual and yet retains individuality. There is the paradox that the person who has reached nirvana neither exists or does not exist. There is the paradox of the extrovertive mystical experience, that objects perceived by the senses are both many and one, that they are both identical and distinct.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Another example of the paradox in mystical experience is illustrated by Suso in referring to an experience which he describes as containing “dazzling obscurity.” Still other examples of paradoxes used such terms as personal impersonality, or statements like the Absolute has qualities but in the Absolute no qualities exist. It would seem that in these paradoxes there exists a disregard for what we in our objective reasoning accept as laws of logic. The paradoxical events are like experiences in dreams, and have been reported time and time again. Therefore, we know that these paradoxes are logical contradictions and are contrary to many of the rules of reasoning.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The mystic may be unable to put into objective consciousness the necessary concepts to translate it into words which correspond with the criteria of normal, day-to-day objective living. Stacey sums up this concept when he says, “And I think it is quite true that taking mystical paradox to be the same as unvarnished contradiction is not a plain matter of indisputable fact but rather an interpretation that must be justified.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Mystical experiences directly affect our concepts of logic and reason. They conflict with many of the laws of logic, and they are not in accord with our normally conceived ideas regarding the processes of reasoning. As far as the mystic is concerned, the mystical experience replaces the laws of logic and reasoning, not that the mystic denies that these exist. In his day-to-day experience, he applies logical conclusions, inferences, and the process of reasoning to the conditions in his environment which he must face as he lives like other human beings. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">But to associate mysticism and logic as being related or complementary to each other is going beyond the area of fact. Reason is at a lower level than the mystical experience. As the mystic says, the mystical inference lies above reasoning. It is to be presumed, then, that what is gained by the mystical experience is far superior to what can be attained by human reason or by any logical procedure. For example, the great inventions and discoveries throughout human history have come about not always through a process of logical conclusion or human reasoning but by adding to the knowledge and experience of the individual the intuitive glimpses that have made possible the completing of situations and ideas that have brought the conclusions we now know exist. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Many inventors acknowledge their achievements have been the result of a hunch, an idea that entered their mind from whence they knew not where. While they did not acknowledge the invention or discovery as the result of a mystical experience, it was definitely a process complemented by an intuitive impression that put together the pieces, as it were, and made possible the culmination of the inventive process.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Mysticism is not a magic formula. The mystical experience does not replace knowledge and hard work. It is necessary to have a degree of experience in order to apply what is received intuitively. The individual who knows nothing of mathematics, for example, is not going to receive by a mystical experience an idea which solves a complicated mathematical problem. There must be a background already ingrained in consciousness. The mystical experience may fill in the gaps.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Various mystics have stated that in a mystical experience they have attained knowledge that was previously not theirs, but that they were unable to utilize, put into words, or even to explain after the experience was over. Nevertheless, I am convinced that in the experience these individuals have established within the subjective conciousness ideas which intuitively crept into their thinking process and helped to conclude the ideas they were working on or were developing. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the end, mysticism transcends logic and reason. It is in a sense a super state, a mental achievement which rises above the limitation of the human mind functioning purely on an objective level. It is the means by which we go beyond what we would be able to do if we had nothing but physical or material training. It adds to the total of human experience by being able to bring into consciousness those bits of knowledge which can be coupled with what we have learned in other areas. By putting them together, they make a completeness that is possible only when the human being has the training and experience to be able to arrive at a combined conclusion resulting from both the physical and the nonphysical sources. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Man is not purely a physical being. He is also a psychic being. Through the psychic faculties that are inherent within consciousness he is able to draw upon the Absolute and bring into experience, through what we call the mystical experience, that which will round out his knowledge and his life. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
