<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-6</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-6" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div id="_idContainer007" class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter I </p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-1" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor000"></a>The Essence of Mysticism</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">A </span><span class="ALL-CAPS">tendency exists </span>today which seems to overlook the past and emphasize the future. The basic disciplines of study which were once common in the curriculum of most institutions of higher learning are becoming less and less popular with the present generation of students. History, mathematics, languages, philosophy, and religion are studies that have categorically been put aside, or at least made secondary.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This attitude applies not only to a single age group but to the general population today. The newspapers and other forms of news media seem to give less emphasis to what has happened in the past and more speculation as to what might happen in the future. Whether or not this type of thinking is good, or whether it may have a detrimental effect upon the future, and more importantly, upon the present, is a question that neither the philosopher nor the politician has been able to answer adequately. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Regardless of what may be our individual opinion, there is evidence from the lives of many individuals who have made their mark in the world that knowledge of the past has assisted in adjustment to the present. This adjustment is the important step that we need to take. We are aware only of the present and the past. The future will develop upon the basis of the adjustments that we make to our present circumstances and the philosophies that we devise in order to fit the circumstances of our present existence.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This is not an appeal to study history nor to live entirely in the area of our memories. It simply indicates the fact that too much emphasis today is placed upon the future. Publications that one examines at the present time usually contain articles and predictions as to what is going to happen tomorrow, a year from tomorrow, or even during the next century. As we approach the end of this century, this outlook becomes more and more common. Similar trends of thought developed at the end of other centuries. Actually, very few of the predictions from a hundred, two hundred, five hundred or more years ago were true predictions of the future of the next century. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We need to be more concerned with the present. We need to develop in our own thinking the means to adjust our thought and outlook to the situations that we face in daily life. In that way we are better preparing ourselves and contributing to the preparation of society to meet whatever the future may hold. It is well to know that the future cannot be predicted accurately. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The future does not exist. Even the Infinite cannot know what does not yet exist. In our desire to know more about the future than the present or the past, we are in the grasp of a materialistic type of philosophy. We are living in a world where the physical conditions are those which predominate in our thought and in our society. These physical considerations, while important, are not the only source of inspiration, knowledge, and instruction needed for the average individual to adjust himself or herself to the needs that are immediately about that individual.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Materialism certainly has its advantages. We live in a world in which materialism has produced a situation, or, we might say, an environment that has made toil less intensive, has relieved us of much worry, has advanced theories of health maintenance, has taught us much that we utilize every day. No one, I believe, would want to give up the accomplishments of materialism which we accept as a matter of course in our daily living. Who would want a world without the conveniences that are accessible to almost every person at the present time? Thus materialism has not only made great progress in entering the lives of each individual, it has by its very nature attached itself to our thinking and to the formation of our habit patterns in such a way as to make us dependent upon it, wanting to respond to it, and furthermore, enjoying most of our contacts with it. Therefore, materialism has made the world what it is today in many respects. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">True, there are those idealists who have contributed much to the background of what has developed into scientific applications of materialism, yet we see and deal each day with the physical and material world. Most of our thought is devoted to it. Is it not time to turn from this line of thought, this type of living, and see if there is more to the world than what materialism can offer? Are there conditions, situations, and guiding lines outside the world of materialism that can help us to live better and understand better ourselves and our society?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We need not abandon the material world, but we need to complement it with those factors which can and will produce a better-balanced life, that will make us not so fearful of what the future may hold, but make us more philosophical in the acceptance of each step that we take as we proceed into the future from the present moment. Materialism has so dominated our thought and activity that many no longer turn to those factors which produced the ideals for which man has lived, for which martyrs have sacrificed their lives, and which have produced the liberty and security that exist in many societies today. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">One of the symbols of materialism is wealth. Money is either loved or condemned. If extremists condemn it, they are only reacting against the forces of materialism. It is true that money cannot produce happiness, necessarily, but it does at least enable us to be miserable in comfort. It produces the means to enjoy the material world. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">But what, we may ask, produces the means to enjoy the immaterial world? What are the steps necessary to reach an understanding of an idealistic life in which we can live not wholly dependent upon the material world of which we are a part but also draw upon factors that will contribute to our advancement and growth? </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Mysticism can play an important part in such a program, but the words mysticism and mystic immediately raise in the minds of many individuals a rather abrupt reaction, a reaction to a situation which they may not understand and may even fear. To the average individual, mysticism holds out a questionable type of thinking, even a form of retrogression, where one turns back to the days of superstition and practices related to magic and ignorance. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the popular sense, mysticism is considered to be something beyond the physical world, where physical bodies may be physically perceived, and therefore beyond the reach of the m an in the street. Popularly, it would seem to be of little value unless the individual was involved in a procedure of daily living, like that of our ancestors, when superstition instead of materialism pervaded the thoughts of men.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Because of an unfortunate misunderstanding of terminology, the accepted relationship of mysticism with mystery has caused the word to carry the connotation of a situation that has no practical value and no apparent use or application. Actually, the essence of mysticism concerns the ability of the human being to reach, grasp, and utilize one of the sources of knowledge. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">With all our progress, whether materialistic or idealistic, whether we subscribe to a religious system of thought or not, or even if we are atheistic or agnostic, the key to living in all its phases is the attainment of knowledge. From infancy to old age, the individual lives to learn and learns to live. The ability of mankind to acquire knowledge and put that knowledge into practice so that it builds up in the individual a vast store of experience that can be applied to the process of living is the key that frees our potentialities to evolve. Without knowledge there would be nothing. Knowledge is the basic source of all experience. Experience is the process of living itself. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We have various means of acquiring knowledge, some of it voluntary and some involuntary. The infant learns, and creatures of the animal kingdom learn, by trial and error. They experiment, as it were, in various ways, and accumulate a usable knowledge related to their own experience as they store it in memory. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The physical senses, therefore, are the most used source of knowledge. We see, feel, hear, smell, and taste the world of which we are a part. Our material self, that is, our body, which many interpret as being our individual self, is a material essence related to the physical world. The five physical senses are the five windows of the physical self through which we take in or perceive the external world. Through that process of perception we learn and accumulate knowledge. Without those five windows on the world we would never be conscious or be aware of the world, of its nature, or of any application that we could make of our knowledge that we gain concerning it through our physical senses. Therefore, these physical senses are very important. They are the key by which we adjust to the environment in which we are born and have to live. They are the means by which we learn to grow. We learn self preservation. We learn how to use other material objects beyond the body itself. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">But there is more to living than physical perception. There is also a source of knowledge that lies within us. We are living beings, and that essence which gives us life is the fundamental, or we might say the nuclear force, of the entire universe. Life is the essence of the entire scope of being. Call its source the Absolute, call it the Divine, call it God, call it whatever you wish. When we come down to the final particulars, life itself, as it expresses in an otherwise physical, material body, is what distinguishes the living being from all other material substances. Without life, we would be like the stone that we find lying on the earth’s surface, but life is a part of an all-over manifestation that functions throughout the universe and expresses itself within our intimate being, which we can call our Inner Self, in contrast to the objective self that receives and interprets the perceptions of the physical senses. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This Inner Self has generally been referred to in many sources and writings as being the soul, a separate entity within us. It is only separate in that it is another channel. There are five physical senses for the convenience, use, and application of the physical body. Then there is the manifestation of life itself, which constitutes the Inner Self, and which receives its sustenance, its existence from the source of all life. Since life is related to the source of everything that is, there must exist within it all knowledge, all wisdom, all understanding. This ultimate source of all knowledge is accessible to the human being who turns his thoughts within himself and establishes a harmonious relationship with that inner being within him.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This experience constitutes real growth, the experience of being able to draw upon the ultimate knowledge. Whether we express this ultimate as the Cosmic, as the Divine Mind, as the Absolute, makes no difference. It is life, the life we can use, the life we can draw upon, the life we can live. If we use all channels of knowledge, both our physical senses and the sense of turning to the Inner Self to listen to the ebb and flow of life, we can accomplish and understand the purpose of life. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This, then, is the essence of mysticism. Mysticism is that discipline which makes it possible for us to reach and understand the source of knowledge that lies beyond the limits of the material universe. This potential ability supersedes a source of knowledge limited to the five physical senses and the material world of which our body is composed. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
