<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-16</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-16" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter XI</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-11" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor010"></a>Mysticism and Ethics</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">A</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">s long as </span>man has lived in a society composed of himself and his fellow human beings, he has established rules and regulations with the primary purpose of governing his morals and behavior. These principles have varied at different times in man’s history. From the time he was a primitive creature to the advanced civilization that we acknowledge today, morals and types of behavior have been as different as many other human expressions and experiences. However, there has never been on the part of humanity as a whole an agreed basis by which such morals and behavior are enforced. They are regulatory in the sense that it is presumed by the highest aspirations of mankind that human beings will abide by some system of regulations which will be beneficial to themselves and not harmful to their fellow men. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Codes of practice and principles have been adopted by many societies. A classic example is the ten commandments of Judaism, which also to a lesser degree, as far as actual practice is concerned, have been adopted by Christianity, Islam, and the Western world in general. Even though they are not literally practiced today, they still stand as one of the basic moral codes upon which correct behavior is based.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">During a period of time in man’s society, both ancient, medieval, and to some extent in modern times, when religion had the uppermost force and power over people’s lives, religion was the enforcer of moral regulations and rules. During the last century in the period known as Victorian, morals were enforced not only by religion but also by the strength of a government which gave at least outward support to moral principles that it believed its citizens should follow. In more recent times, many believe that the value of morals has substantially declined. The practices that are current and accepted today are not in accord with the moral standards that were considered the best example of one’s ability to live in cooperation with other individuals. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">What is needed, and what has been debated in many societies is a basis upon which the ethical rights and duties of the individual should be founded. What is the source of such practices? Many writers in the field of mysticism confirm an idealistic philosophy, that is, that the final source of ethical values lies within mysticism. It is a basis for moral precepts. Its most important contribution to the welfare of the individual and to society is that it stands as a source of all ethics. Morals and behavior can and will be governed by the concept of mysticism. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">According to this point of view, mystical experience is that phase of human experience from which moral feelings and concepts originate. Moral values are therefore considered to be a function of that which is experienced as the highest human good. Mysticism is the highest basis upon which we can conceive any system of thought or any practiced discipline contributing to the welfare of man. Mysticism is related to human behavior. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Many of us are accustomed to the idea that religion alone has been the preserver and upholder of the moral and ethical concept, yet Plotinus, for example, subscribed to no religion. His concepts are based upon his philosophical background and upon pure mysticism. He stated that ethics and morals will take care of themselves once man has wisely chosen the proper mode of living. That proper mode, in accordance with his concept, is communion with the ultimate, absolute, or divine nature of the universe and the awareness of its expression in the universe, such as beauty in nature. Any action that violates natural decency can nullify happiness, but the very nature of man’s search for the divine should preclude lapses into evil conduct. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">“It is not by casting about here and there, outside itself, that the soul will understand morality and ethical conduct,” Plotinus stated. “It knows them of its own nature, as welling out of itself.” Plotinus seemed to believe intuitively in the moral principle and that it came about as the result of a simple way of living. To that extent we might say that he practiced a moderate and healthful asceticism. Plotinus maintained in his mind a constant image of good. He felt that he attracted good in the world, stating that good is normal and that man should obtain it. It is ever-present, even to those who temporarily disregard divine law and therefore are not practicing the moral concepts and ideals to which they subscribe. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In this regard, Plotinus said, “In each of us there is something of this entity. Wherever you may be, you have only to open to this omnipresent good the faculty in you which is capable of drawing from it; your share flows to you.” He mentions the problem of evil by saying as a result of concept, evil is shut out. “All who have possessed themselves of the good find it sufficient. Essentially, one’s aspiration is less away from evil than toward the highest and noblest comprehensible to the soul; this attained all has been one and there is peace, the intended condition of life.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">All the beliefs and doctrines of Plotinus grew like branches out of the tree of his mystical experience. So said Sheldon Cheney in writing of his experiences. We are now able to apply his concept that association and attunement with the Absolute is the basis of the mystical theory of ethics. It is in the separateness of each individual self which produces the egoism that is a source of conflict, grasping, aggressiveness, selfishness, cruelty, malice, and other forms of evil. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The mystical consciousness abolishes separateness. All distinctions are annulled. It must be conceded that probably the vast majority of mankind do not concern themselves with the nature of mysticism and have no awareness of the nature of the mystical experience. Some might question how mysticism can be the source or basis of ethics if the majority of individuals are not concerned with it. I believe that some faint mystical sense is latent in all men. It is a part of ourselves, instinctive, as it were, influencing the feelings and lives of many individuals without their understanding or knowing the source of such conditions. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Even the primitive individual, or the uncultivated or the debased person today may have at some time in his life feelings of affection, sympathy, kindness, or good will. These must have sprung from some source. We can theorize that they sprang from a mystical source, that is, the inherent mystical sense latent within the soul itself, within the life essence that causes man to be, that does come to the surface at certain times, and through which ethical experiences and attitudes are exhibited. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Ethical values arise out of the mystical sense that is within everyone. It becomes a profound mystical experience in certain individuals who have advanced to the point of being conscious of the existence of this force within them. It has its source in the universal self, in the Absolute, which is the foundation of the world, or, we might say the Cosmic. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Ethical value, then, is not something that has been humanly devised. Rather, from the innermost depths of the individual being, it is founded upon and reflects the nature of the universe itself. In accordance with the pantheistic concept, it is of the nature of the Absolute. This thinking will cause us to reject the idea that the world and the lives that populate it are indifferent to higher values. In the mystical theory that we have put forth, we accept the fact that love and compassion are feelings which are a necessary part of the mystical foundation. These high ideals enter into human behavior and become a part of man’s behavior during his lifetime. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The mystical experience, then, is the basis by which ethical values become overt, that is, expressed in human behavior, whether the experience be explicit or latent. In most people, it is often submerged in the subconscious or Inner Self, and regardless of the individual, from time to time, it brings to the surface of thinking and behavior the feelings of sympathy and love. Love might therefore be considered as a groping toward the individuality of the universal self, which is the essence of mysticism. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Plotinus, the most philosophical of all recorded mystics, has shown conformance with this theory. We can look even further. We find in Buddhism that the same principle exists. There is conceived a pure source of ideas that rest within the universal mind. In Hindu thought, the doctrine that the mystical consciousness is potential in all of us appears frequently throughout the Upanishads. In them we find reiterated that the individual self is identical with the universal self. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In Christian mysticism we find repeated examples, particularly in the writings of Eckhart, that the soul is not the possession of mystics only, but of all men, and it is identical with the mind essence of the Buddhist, or with the mystical consciousness of the Hindus. The mystic achieves, according to Eckhart, the ability to reach to the Inner Self and bring out into empirical expression the high ideals of love and compassion, which are the expression of the mystical concept. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Thus, the mystical consciousness is potential to a degree in all individuals. It is what the mystics of the East have always held without question and what is implied in many of the philosophical writings of the Christian mystics. These considerations are expressed by Stacey. “We are left with the assurance that the mystical consciousness should be, for those who possess it, a powerful motive and impulsion toward ethical, and therefore toward social action.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">For the mystic, there is in the universe a power not of ourselves but of the universal self, which makes for righteousness. That there is such a power seems probable when one considers the ethical and spiritual progress of the human race. We might state this in another way by saying that it seems difficult or impossible to account for all the achievements which, taken together, constitute civilization, without assuming the existence of such a power. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">How can we account for man’s advancement from the most primitive form to the present concept of ethical insight and behavior unless we assume the presence and activity of some divine or universal agency in the universe? Just to list man’s achievements in industry, business, science, government, art, morals, and religion seems to confirm the presence in the world of a force of a higher nature than man himself, which is a directing force in universal events. If this fundamental principle of mysticism is not true, then all that we call worthwhile in our environment, all values, all achievements, are the result of blind chance. All would be illusion. Such a concept would lead to despair and pessimism. The point of view opened by mysticism is the concept that leads to hope and optimism.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
