<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-10</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-10" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter V</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-5" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor004"></a>The Mystical Experience</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">I</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">n the concept </span>of mysticism, time is unreal and space is considered an appearance only. In our daily lives as physical beings, time and space play an important part, in some way or another affecting our lives practically all the time. We are in a continual state of adjusting ourselves to the existence of time and to the demands of space. We have to make appointments, we have to carry out certain routines, we have to work or we wish to play, and all of these activities will be affected to a degree by a time schedule. In addition, every move that we make will be affected by the fact that we will have to cross over the intervening space in order to adjust ourselves from one area to another. What this means is that time and space are vital, physical conditions. When we are completely in a physical state, we are influenced by them. We have to take their consequences into consideration in practically everything that we do.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Leaving the area in which time and space are so binding, where these factors are no longer the hindrance or the aid that they appear to be under physical conditions, we enter an area that is unknown to most individuals, an area that has not been experienced. Immediately the question is raised as to what kind of adjustments and what kind of experiences take place in a situation where time and space are no longer vital factors. Therefore, the question arises as to whether or not the mystical experience truly exists. The materialist who devotes his or her entire life and efforts to matters that concern the physical world may doubt that a mystical experience is anything more than mere imagination. Materialists have even gone so far as to criticize those who claim to have had mystical experiences. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The mystical experience is no more or less than becoming conscious of an area that lies outside the normal range of our physical senses. It is the area in which the physical senses take second place, and knowledge comes into consciousness through the awareness of the Inner Self because the life force within us manifests itself and registers upon our consciousness. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">As to whether or not every mystical experience that has been referred to or recorded by anyone is valid is something that we cannot determine. Only through introspection can we examine the mystical experience that happens to be ours. Therefore, I cannot judge what you report to be a mystical experience; neither can you examine mine or that of anyone else. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Throughout all time, throughout man’s history there have been those individuals who have reported having an experience in which the physical and the material become completely subordinated. They become aware of sensations, of knowledge, and of events that come to them as clearly and as plainly as if they were perceiving physical objects through the physical senses. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Those who hold that there is no experience that can validly be defined as mystical believe that those who claim to have had such experiences are merely reporting what has been the result of imagination, dreams, or hallucinations. Actually, we can analyze the difference between objective realizations on the one hand and dreams and hallucinations on the other. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Objective realization is usually a clear-cut experience. We will not here go into the metaphysical argument as to what is real and whether or not what we perceive is actually a duplication of what exists in the external, physical world. We will accept at least as a working hypothesis the naive philosophy that realization and actuality of the physical world are identical. This is a matter of question, of course, but it is one upon which most people will find a degree of common belief. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">On the other hand, dreams and hallucinations lie in an entirely different area of realization. I may go to bed at night in my home and during the night dream that I am in a foreign country. I carry on a conversation, possibly, with a stranger or a friend. I perform certain acts. I do things that are similar to those that 1 do in my waking hours, but I awake and find myself in my own bed. I have not moved. Space has evidently disappeared in my dream experience, because I seemed to have moved, for example, from the area in which I live to another country, but at the same time remained in my own bed. I had experiences that were logical, but yet I did not actually meet the people with whom I seemed to have carried on conversations. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In other words, while my experience was parallel to that of an objective experience, I know that it could not have been a true physical experience, because the physical circumstances and environment had not changed. I had gone through a mental enactment of a condition that duplicated to a degree the physical realizations that I have, but yet could not have physically happened. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Hallucinations are even more extreme experiences. Those who experience hallucinations may be suffering from a disease, from an overdose of drugs, or from some other physical condition that has upset them mentally and physically. The hallucination ceases to have reason or order in comparison with a physical experience. This situation also sometimes exists in dreams, but it is always an accompaniment of hallucinations. It is entirely different from that of our objective realization. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Down through the ages, those who have reported their mystical experiences report that they did not dream, that they did not hallucinate, that their experience was a logical and a factual one. They come out of it, as it were, with a realization of something that had taken place that had significance and meaning. It could not be confused with a dream or hallucination. I con sider the mystical experience to be the individual’s ability to use mysticism practically, to be put in touch with the source of life, with the Absolute or Universal One existing within the universe and known to us only through the expression of life as an entity or force manifesting within a physical body. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There are certain psychological characteristics of the mystical experience that make it identifiable as an actual experience and not merely a segment of imagination, a dream, or hallucination. Of these characteristics, the first is that the mystical experience is immediate and direct. It is an experience as certain as my now perceiving the top of the desk at which I sit is an experience. It is complete. The mystical experience parallels the physical experience in that sense. There is nothing about it that leaves a doubt as to its existence. It is a direct realization that comes to the individual, who is immediately aware that he has in a sense touched a source of energy, power, or realization. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A second characteristic of the mystical experience is that it is unifying. It is complete and consistent. It is comparable to a physical, perceptive experience, in that the perception makes sense, has a beginning, a middle, and an end. Critics might say that such an interpretation is inconsistent with the statement that most mystical experiences are ineffable. What we are necessarily acknowledging here is that the inferences derived from the experience make it possible for the individual who has had such an experience to be able to draw upon it as if it were a whole. It is complete and not a haphazard experience of events or thoughts that might occur, for example, in a dream. Such unification of experience helps give a feeling of authority. It can be brought into consciousness and applied in a manner that is useful and that is a part of the individual’s total life experience. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A third characteristic of the mystical experience is that it intimately unites the outer and Inner Self, in turn creating a new concept of the subject-object relationship. In our ordinary world of existence, there is always a question in regard to the relationship of the subject to the object. The metaphysical question arises as to whether the subject ever truly perceives or not. When I look around me, I believe I am perceiving a physical environment, but all that I really know is the interpretation that takes place within my mind. The mental states that exist within me are the reflection of the perceptions that I have of my environment. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Berkeley, the famous philosopher of idealism, made the claim that external perception is to a degree an illusion, that perceptive experience is completely within our own minds. We only think we perceive the physical environment which becomes the subject of perception. His concept was that the universe is without existence, that perception does not agree with the object believed to be perceived. While there is a degree of validity to his argument, most idealists do not accept this extreme concept. They are usually associated with the thinking of objective idealism, that is, that the mental perceptive process substantially agrees with the physical world which we perceive. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Through experience, most of us believe that what we perceive physically is substantially a duplication of what actually exists outside of ourselves. However, in the mystical experience, the subject-object relationship disappears entirely. There is no duplication of the physical experience, where the individual as a subject is perceiving an external condition, event, or object as a unit in itself, separate from the subject. In the mystical experience there is a complete realization that events are taking place, and that what is taking place is true and valid, but there seems to be a correlation or unification of the object and subject. The whole experience is absorbed in a manner that does not detect a distinction between the subject and object. This impression, which is one of the unifying effects of the mystical experience, leaves no doubt within the mind of the individual as to the existence of the events and the knowledge that is acquired as a part of the mystical experience. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A fourth characteristic of the mystical experience is that it is usually considered to be ineffable. It is difficult to communicate in words. Some years ago, one school of psychology known as behaviorism made the definition of thinking as being no more or no less than sub vocal talking; that is, we simply talk to ourselves, and this sub vocal talking is the process of thought. While most psychologists do not accept this theory, it nevertheless has a degree of truth. Most of our thinking is formulated in words. We live our daily lives depending on words. We think in terms of the language with which we are most familiar. Words are used as a constant means of conveying our own thoughts and gaining the thoughts of others. Expression in words is such a common fact and common experience that we give little consideration to it.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If we have an experience that is not expressed in words, it becomes, first of all, rather vague, possibly even misunderstood. That is why many individuals when first having a mystical experience are somewhat surprised if not stunned by the fact that they have become aware of the existence of an actual experience taking place, but since it is not in terms of language, they are unable to completely understand it, and even less able to express the content and nature of their experience in terms that are ordinarily intelligible to themselves and to others.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The mystical experience lies outside the field of man made things, including language. Therefore, it is something to be learned. The first experiences may be vague and transitory. For example, as soon as a vision is perceived, before it can be comprehended or grasped, the curtain that hides it from our ordinary sight is dropped and the vision is gone. However, one fact re mains. The individual who has such an experience immediately feels that he has become related to a situation, a series of events, or a source of knowledge with which he was once familiar and which has been lost to him in the interim. This feeling of nostalgia seems to be ever present with the mystical experience. Just as beauty can be beheld momentarily and then seem to be gone, so the mystical experience may be like a flash that registers upon the consciousness. Before it is completely grasped, we have passed on to thinking of other things. As we reflect, we are unable to put into words what our experience was. That these experiences will at first be momentary and transient is typical of the mystical experience. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It is only the individual who devotes himself to the necessary exercises, practices, and concentration upon the meaning of mysticism who is able to grasp these experiences and make them more permanent. Such growth consists more of feelings than expression in words, which only later can condense into ideas and form a part of our total consciousness. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Still another characteristic of the mystical is that it produces a sense of unreliability with respect to time and space. Having been so dependent upon these factors in our general living experience, we immediately feel that we have lost our contact with them. The experience may be fleeting and difficult to grasp but leaves a deep sense of authority and universal meaning when it is impressed upon the consciousness of the individual. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Hundreds have testified to these facts. It is not an imaginative condition. It is a transient event in which we are put in touch with forces that lie beyond the physical world but one in which we are united, even though temporarily, with the Absolute. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
