<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-14</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-14" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter IX</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-9" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor008"></a>Theism and Pantheism in Mysticism</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">I</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">n the Western </span>world particularly, there are two general views as to the relationship of God to the world. These are known as theism and pantheism. These two theories are more in accord today in respect to a number of doctrines because of the influence of science upon theology, but there is still a distinct difference in the emphasis between the two views. In pantheism the doctrine of inherence is stressed. God is the original substance and all things manifest this substance. On the other hand, theism stresses the doctrine of causality. God is the fundamental cause of all things but not inherent in them. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">According to pantheism, all living things, events, and inanimate objects partake of the nature of God. According to theism, created things that exist in the universe may or may not partake of the full nature of the Creator.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Theism is expressed in two general forms. God is conceived as in some form transcendent to His world, according to one idea. In this view, the power of God is constantly present and functioning in all the affairs of the universe. This operational presence is usually considered to be a force of goodness, a power, as it were, that makes for righteousness. According to another consideration, God, while transcendent to the universe, is also immanent in it. In this concept the world is a manifestation of God’s nature but only a partial manifestation. This form of theism is different from pantheism. In pantheism God and the universe are identical, and God is impersonal. On the other hand, theism teaches that God is a personality. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the Western world, the three most prominent religions, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam are based fundamentally upon theism. Each of these religions has grown out of the other and has carried the mono theistic principle of Judaism to the extreme consideration that God is a force or power that expresses itself individually. To many believers, particularly among the devout of these three religions, God is a person, a heavenly father, to whom they can direct their prayers and supplications. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In mysticism we are concerned with the principle that the individual can relate himself to this ultimate force regardless of how we describe it. The mystical experience is not merely subjective; neither is it an objective experience, but it is essentially what the mystics themselves claim it to be - a relationship intimately established between the self of the individual and the absolute force of the universe.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We can call this force anything we want to -- the Absolute, the One, the Unity -- or we can, as a matter of convenience because of the general acceptance and understanding, use the term God. It makes no difference which term we select. The mystic in his experience is concerned with a direct experience of this One, this Universal Self, this God. He is concerned with relating himself to that ultimate force, regardless of what its nature may be. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We are primarily concerned with the relation of that force in respect to its identity or difference. Are God and the world identical, as many have claimed, or is this force wholly distinct from the physical universe itself? Does the mystical experience throw any light upon this relationship? </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Those who accept pantheism describe the relationship between God and the universe as a condition of simple identity. God and the universe are one. The universe is considered to be the creation of the Absolute rather than being the creation of an individual entity, such as found in theism. Pantheism tends toward the idea that the universe is an extension, as it were, of this absolute force of God. This concept is definitely expressed in most of the Eastern religions. In many passages of the Upanishads we find that while speaking in terms that are not purely philosophical abstractions, they nevertheless convey the idea that what we conceive as God is an expression found in all things and is not limited to any one individual or personality. The Vedanta religious concept definitely supports the idea of pantheism.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In Western thought, we find one of the great proponents of pantheism was Spinoza, who held that God is a manifestation rather than being merely a First Cause. There is the famous statement by Spinoza, “I hold that God is the immanent, and not the extraneous, cause of all things.” This statement definitely links the relationship of God to the entire manifestation of the universe. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In Christian mysticism we find the emphasis placed on theism. Christianity itself is a theistic religion. It is to be expected that the mystics who adhered to Christianity would conform to the theistic belief. For exam pie, Meister Eckhart expressed in his writings and sermons many statements that caused him to be accused by church authorities as claiming identity with God and therefore touching closely upon pantheism, rather than adhering strictly to the theistic doctrine of the church. He wrote, “In union with God I discover that God and I are one. I am the unmoved mover that moves all things. Here too God is identical with the spirit.” In probably one of his best known statements, he wrote, “The eye by which I see God is the same as the eye by which God sees me. My eye and God’s eye are one and the same -- one in seeing, one in knowing, one in loving.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">These are examples of the philosophical as well as the religious concepts of Eckhart which gave him some difficulty with the church. In fact, Eckhart was accused of heresy. This matter was never settled, as his heresy was not brought to a final trial by the church in his lifetime. Eckhart denied heresy. Although he repeatedly refers to the fact of his relationship with God as being an identity, he did not openly claim to be a pantheist. In fact, he claimed to conform to the principles of the church, and therefore to the basic principles of theism. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The theologians and officials of the church, particularly during the Middle Ages and even to some extent in modern times, definitely indicated their distrust of pantheism and have always at the slightest sign of it declared a heresy. The causes of the distrust are due to the principle that theism stresses the idea of a personal God. On the other hand, pantheism upholds an impersonal Absolute. In the three theistic religions, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, the belief in a personal God is one of the fundamentals of worship. Christian worship is concerned with prayer directed to a personal God. In prayer, the Christian asks for forgiveness, health, and grace. Obviously, with this principle underlying a belief in God, pantheism cannot be accepted, because the theist could not pray to the universe. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Theism claims that pantheism cannot deal with the problem of evil. If all that exists is of a divine nature, an expression of god, how can we explain evil as being divine also? Furthermore, in theism, man is considered to be belittled by God. He is nothing but dust and ashes. He is a sinful being and has to be redeemed. Therefore, a personal relationship has to be supposed. Pantheism does not provide for such a personal relationship. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">For many mystics, the concept of identity, that is, being one with God, as stated in the pantheistic concept, is appealing. Many Christian mystics, such as Eckhart, have tended toward the idea of identity with God, which has led to a deviation from pure theism. However, the mystical experience is usually devoid of any consciousness of either theism or pantheism. In statements made by mystics, they, as a general rule, were not concerned with the religious or philosophical considerations of any differences between theism and pantheism in the course of the mystical experience itself. The mystic did not care whether or not God was of one nature or another, whether God sat on a throne, or acted as a heavenly father, or was immanent within the universe and transcended it at the same time, or was a force that manifested through all things, or that identity was the key to the explanation of the relationship between God and all other things. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The mystic was concerned with his own experience. He claimed -- and we believe him -- to have an experience that related him to a force greater than himself. The nature of that force, or at least an explanation of its nature, was secondary to the experience. Mysticism is primarily concerned with reaching the Absolute, or the Universal One that exists behind all other manifestations. Mysticism is more interested in the experience of relating the individual to that fundamental source than it is in any philosophical or religious speculation as to the nature of the source itself. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We might conclude that while speculation as to the nature of God and a study of the theistic and pantheistic concepts prove interesting and informative, they are secondary insofar as the mystic is concerned in his attempt to reach a union or an identity with this Ultimate Source and to translate his experiences into a practical application of living that will help him to better understand himself and his relationship to the universe, and to be a guide so that the mystic may direct others toward the attainment of peace and fulfillment. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
