<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-12</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-12" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter VII</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-7" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor006"></a>Perception of Mystical Experiences</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">I </span><span class="ALL-CAPS">have often </span>heard the comment from many different individuals who have studied mysticism that they never have had a mystical experience. They wonder why some individuals have such experiences and others do not have the experiences. In my estimation this conclusion is erroneous. I am convinced that all human beings have had a mystical experience at some time in their life. Usually they have many. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Possibly the most orthodox materialist might so resist the concept of mysticism as to have practically no such experience in a lifetime, but I doubt that even this is possible. The problem concerns the interpretation of what constitutes a mystical experience. Even though we have already examined some of the factors involved in the mystical experience, we have not yet considered some of the simplest mystical experiences. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There is a general misconception that every mystical experience must be an overpowering phenomenon, a condition that overwhelms the individual, such as that described by Dr. Bucke, who was quoted earlier. Such experiences do exist, but they are probably in the minority. On the other hand, the individual who has not had an overwhelming experience is not apt to make a record of a simple occurrence.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A mystical experience does not have to be accompanied by flashes of lightning or the ringing of bells. It can be a very simple experience, an intuitive impression, a hunch, an idea that helps individuals in their life, their work, or whatever they are planning to do. A hunch may direct them to avoid an action, or to do the right thing when another step would be the wrong, or to make a decision that will be of benefit to them and others.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">All of these experiences are in the strictest sense of the word mystical. I can give an example from personal experience. Recently, while tuning in a program on my stereo, I suddenly heard a musical strain that appealed to me. I stopped the tuning to listen to the musical composition that was being played. What it was does not matter. The fact that the composition appealed to me, caused me to stop and listen, is the significant factor. It triggered what I would interpret as a mystical experience. As I listened to this particular musical composition, I suddenly felt an all-over feeling of relaxation,  of peace, of general content. As the music continued, these feelings seemed to deepen. Furthermore, while not losing consciousness, I seemed to have my attention and complete consciousness focused upon this music, which became the overpowering part of my state of consciousness at that moment. As a result, I felt greatly improved, felt inspired, and felt generally a sense of well-being from having gone through an experience in which I experienced a state of oneness. Just the music, or rather, just my consciousness of the music to a degree confirms Stacey’s definition of an extrovertive mystical experience. This was simple. There were no unusual phenomena involved. It was nevertheless a satisfying and a revealing period of time, even though it lasted for only a few moments. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">What we perceive externally and what we perceive from within ourselves are frequently keys to triggering an experience that is in the realm of the mystical experience. I believe most people have in one way or the other experienced such a condition, and therefore the mystical experience is not a foreign condition, a condition limited to only a few of the great in the past who have recorded it. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">When we examine our consciousness at any time, we find that it is composed mainly of elements of the external world, the result of the sensations that continuously bombard our consciousness through our sense faculties. Sensation is therefore the consciousness of the quality of objects in our environment. Sensations also reach consciousness from an internal source that wells up within us. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">On the other hand, perception in the physical sense is a consciousness of objects, the result of the presentation of a group of physical conditions that are impressed upon our senses. For example, we do not have a sensation of a rose. Rather, we perceive the rose. We sense its qualities one at a time. These qualities can be color, form, tactile sensations, or fragrance. They are all experienced. We may experience them simultaneously. As a result, we perceive the total object. The perception, however, is not an unrelated group of sensations which we have perceived by seeing the color, sensing the form, or smelling the rose itself. It is a unit of experience. It is a complete experience of a single object and not the experience of a group of separate qualities. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We perceive because of the ability of consciousness to absorb what is external to it. That does not mean that perception has to be limited to the physical world. We can perceive the conditions that exist within us, both mentally and physically. Such perception is primarily objective. We are so familiar with our day-to-day lives in a material world that we relate the process of perception to the physical world and to what our seeing, hearing, feeling, tasting, and smelling bring to us in sensations, which are put together in our mental processes of consciousness to produce the perception of a complete object.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If the mystical experience is valid, the premise accepted here, it is worthwhile to analyze, as far as it is possible for us to do so, the procedure, the means of the perception of mystical experiences. I have previously referred to the fact that insofar as an objective perception is concerned, we judge the validity of an objective perception by its orderliness. If the things we perceive are in accord with the laws of nature, as we understand them, we believe the objective perception to be true. We believe we are perceiving what is actually taking place.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If the situation were disorderly, for example, if I held my finger in a flame and it did not burn, I would be aware of the fact that my perception was faulty, that I was having an hallucination. In the case of a dream, we might dream an improbable or impossible situation, but we know that we are not experiencing the regularity that constitutes objective perception. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We might therefore conclude that conformance to natural law, orderliness, in other words, is a basis for the validity of objectivity. Can we apply to the mystical states of consciousness the same rule to determine whether or not the mystical experience, or any conscious mystical state, is objective or subjective? We therefore ask the question, “Are mystical experiences orderly?” Orderliness seems to be a means of establishing the validity of a perception of any kind. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I like the definition of Stacey in regard to this matter. “The definition of order is the constant conjunction of repeatable items of experience.” This definition summarizes that to which we have already referred, that the objective experience which is valid, and the perception which is valid conform to nature’s laws and are in accord with the objective experience that is the common lot of all human beings. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The definition just given can also apply to perception of nonphysical things, that is, to a “constant conjunction of repeatable items of experience.” This orderliness also applies equally to experiences that do not originate through the physical senses, and I conclude that mystical experiences can be considered to be orderly in the sense in which we are considering these points.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We might ask if the conclusions we have come to apply to the introvertive type of mystical experience. Does it consist of a constant conjunction of items of non sensory experience? The answer is that it obviously does not because various experiences develop. Every individual who has an introvertive experience finds a difference in the experience itself, although the ultimate end may be the same. There are no repeatable conditions. Of all the mystical experiences that have ever been had by any individual, there will be running through them a series of differences that distinguish each one from the other. Therefore, we will have to conclude that the introvertive mystical experience is not objective.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The opposite of the objective experience is the subjective experience, one that takes place in consciousness itself. We have already come to the conclusion that many subjective experiences lack order. For example, I can dream that water runs uphill. I can imagine that I see an animal that does not exist. The victim of delirium tremens, for example, would be familiar with such an hallucination. A dream, hallucination, or mystical experience can have extreme differences and can lack validity if they are not within the realm of reason or natural law. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Objective experience, when we consider it valid, does not conflict with the natural order that we find in the universe with which we are familiar. We can conclude also that the experience of a subjective nature which conflicts with reason and with the laws of living and the principles of life itself is also invalid. Therefore, it would be considered that the introvertive mystical experience is not subjective. We have come to the conclusion, if we are in agreement, that the mystical experience is neither objective nor subjective. It exists in an area of its own. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">When we remember that in a mystical experience the various elements that compose it might be considered to be objective, the experience itself is not necessarily objective. Only the core, that is, the oneness of the experience, is the subjective factor. We must proceed further if we are to analyze more specifically how the mystical experience is perceived. Certainly there should be no sound arguments against the validity of there actually having been mystical experiences. We must acknowledge the many independent reports of those who have had mystical experiences; these reports come from different cultures, different periods of history, different parts of the world - some from the ancient Hindus, from the medieval Christians, from the Persians, Arabians, Buddhists, China, Japan, modern Europeans, and American intellectuals. All this agreement of oneness and Universal Attunement with a higher force should be a basis for believing in the validity of the experience.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">What we can agree upon is that the mystical experience is a self-transcending one. When I had the feelings of peace and relaxation triggered by a piece of music, the self was transcended. I no longer was limited to the use of my objective sense faculties. I was not being affected by disorderly conditions of subjective consciousness causing hallucinations. I simply felt a sense of oneness that was created by this immediate familiarity with a condition that transcended my normal conscious states. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the mystical experience we have not only reached our individual Inner Self, our individual ego, but we have in some way contacted and associated ourselves with a universal self, a universal oneness and force that supersedes all types of human perception. In many of our daily acts we lose consciousness of things going on about us. We may work at a desk or a bench and think only of what we are doing and nothing else. Outside activities fail to make any degree of impression upon our consciousness. So it is in the mystical experience that we become absorbed in the experience itself, in a relationship with a self or universal ego that transcends the individual and of which the individual self is only a branch or a part. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There is, no doubt, an ultimate or universal Cosmic self. Call it by whatever name you choose, it is with this entity that in the mystical experience contact is made. The participating individual becomes identified with this universal self. He goes beyond the subjective and the objective. He reaches a state of trans-subjectivity where he is associated and intimately related to the universal force that pervades all the universe. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
