<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-11</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-11" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter VI</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-6" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor005"></a><span class="ALL-CAPS">Types of Mystical Experience</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph-2"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">“I </span><span class="ALL-CAPS">had spent </span>the evening in a great city, with two friends reading and discussing poetry and philosophy. I had a long drive home to my lodging. My mind was calm and peaceful. All at once, without warning of any kind, I found myself wrapped in a flame-colored cloud. For an instant I thought of fire somewhere in that great city; in the next I knew that the fire was in myself. Directly afterwards there came upon me a sense of exaltation, of immense joyousness accompanied or immediately followed by an intellectual illumination impossible to describe. Among other things I did not merely come to believe but I saw that the universe is not composed of dead matter, but is, on the contrary, a living presence. I became conscious in myself of eternal life. I saw that the cosmic order is such that without any peradventure all things work together for the good of each and all; that the foundation of the world is love. The vision lasted a few seconds and was gone, but the memory of it and the sense of reality it left has remained during the quarter of a century which has since elapsed. I knew that what the vision showed me was true. That conviction has never been lost.”</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The experience referred to in the above quotation by Dr. R. M. Bucke happened about a hundred years ago. It seems to me to be an important example of a mystical experience because of the details reported and because the experience provided an influence that endured in consciousness. It also has the characteristics listed in the last chapter of the typical mystical experience. It is an excellent example of an experience that was not influenced by a theological or a religious background in the sense that Dr. Bucke was associated actively with or advocating any religious organization or group. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">From his own words, Dr. Bucke had apparently never before experienced anything of a similar nature. It had come to him very suddenly. The background of Dr. Bucke’s training was, for the days in which he lived, scientific. He was not known to have flights of imagination or to be in any way related to a type of group which would influence him to have an imaginative experience. The experience was specifically that of Dr. Bucke. It was individual. We must, of course, acknowledge that the statement quoted above was his interpretation. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the study of mysticism the area of individual interpretation is very important. The mystical experience, considered by many to be ineffable, is difficult to put in to words. Many individuals have stated that their experience was impossible to express then proceed to explain it in words. Although the cynic or the agnostic might say that all experiences of which we have record are merely the imaginative ideas that the individual stated as being the experience, the interpretation of the individual is sincere.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">W. T. Stacey classifies mystical experience in two general categories, the extrovertive and the introvertive. One of the classic examples that Stacey gives of the extrovertive experience is a statement by Meister Eckhart, in which Eckhart said, “All that a man has here externally in multiplicity is intrinsically one. Here all blades of grass, wood, and stone, all things are one. This is the deepest depth.” Eckhart’s statement that all things are one, that there is no substantial difference between anything if we are able to perceive the heart of things is the basis upon which the extrovertive experience is interpreted. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Another example of the oneness of all that is was referred to in the quotation by Dr. Bucke, in which he saw the universe as “a living presence.” The individual looking out into the world in such an experience, or in his interpretation of the experience after it is past, has found this expression of oneness, which Stacey classifies as an example of extrovertive experience. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Another example, somewhat typical of the same type of experience, was that of Santa Teresa, who said, “One day being in prayer it was granted to me to perceive in one instant how all things are seen and contained in God. I did not perceive them to be in their proper form, and nevertheless the view I had of them was of a sovereign clearness, and has remained vividly impressed upon my soul.” Santa Teresa was neither the philosopher nor the scientist who has been the source of many other experiences. She was, shall we say, more naive, but in her simple experience, she too experienced a oneness which indicates the same principle that many other mystics have experienced, that is, a oneness in the universe, or, we might say in reverse, a universal oneness that underlies all manifestation.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Still another experience indicative of the same principle was that of Rudolf Otto, who said, “they see all not in a process of becoming, but in being, and they see themselves in the other. Each being contains within itself the whole intelligible world. Therefore all is everywhere. Each is there all and all is each.” This is simply another example of the perception of oneness in which the individual participating in the experience of a mystical nature is perceiving a universal fundamental, a oneness that pervades all. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In all these experiences as they have been interpreted there exists a revelation that the universe is alive, that it is in a sense an expression of the fact that we can never consider anything in the universe as a mass of dead matter but rather a manifestation of a universal force that exists throughout all creation. Wordsworth expressed the same idea in lines from one of his poems: </p>
			<p class="poem"><span class="CharOverride-4">A sense sublime of something far more deeply infused, </span></p>
			<p class="poem"><span class="CharOverride-4">A motion and a spirit which impels </span></p>
			<p class="poem"><span class="CharOverride-4">All thinking things, all objects of all thought, </span></p>
			<p class="poem"><span class="CharOverride-4">And rolls through all things. </span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The extrovertive mystical experience as Stacey outlines it is repeatedly a continuation of these statements of Universal Oneness. However, the introvertive experience, in his classification, is one that has no similarity with physical perception; that is, it is an experience that seems to supersede physical perception. Furthermore, the introvertive experience, as it has been described, seems to be universal in the sense that it has occurred to individuals in many parts of the world. These occurrences have taken place regardless of the cultures, the religions, the philosophies, the locations, the time, and the experience of the ones who have had experiences of a mystical nature. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">These experiences have occurred even though it may seem that the physical senses and all physical sensations have been excluded from consciousness. Stacey says, “The paradox is that there should be a positive experience which has no positive comment -- an experience which is both something and nothing.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Our normal day-to-day experience relates itself to objects in our environment, to the physical world. Furthermore, we also are able to live within our own mental capacities and to perceive the nature of our mental states introspectively. If we were to eliminate or cancel from consciousness all mental states, the self would be purely an entity in itself and nothing more. That entity would exist without physical contact or internal introspection and would be the difference between the individual who lives in a physical experience and the one who lives purely in a mental experience as being a manifestation of the ability of the individual to enter into a universal oneness. The pure ego of the self would then be the one entity that holds together all objective and subjective phenomena within the mind of the individual.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the Upanishads, one of its writers states that there are three kinds of mental conditions: a waking consciousness, which we would call objective; a state of dreaming, which is completely subjective, and a dreamless sleep. It is written, “The fourth, say the wise, is not the knowledge of the senses nor is it relative knowledge, nor yet inferential knowledge. Beyond the senses, beyond the understanding, beyond all expression, is the fourth. It is pure unitary consciousness wherein awareness of the world and of the multiplicity is completely obliterated. It is ineffable peace. It is the supreme good. It is the one without a second. It is the self.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This statement in the Upanishads seems to separate the mystical experience from anything except the self. The self is the one that both experiences and interprets what has occurred within the Inner Self. The experience as it was stated was “beyond all expression.” It was impossible to put into words. It was ineffable. This, we find, is one of the common characteristics of the introvertive mystical experience, regardless of where it occurs or the background of the one who reports the experience. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">One of the great mystics of the Catholic Church, was John van Ruysbroeck, who writes, “The God-seeing man can always enter, naked and unencumbered with images, into the inmost part of the spirit. There he finds revealed an eternal light. His spirit is undifferentiated and without distinction, and therefore it feels nothing but the unity.” Except for Eckhart, this example is in a different area from the ones previously quoted, in which the mystical experience is one of unity with a universal force, a oneness that expresses throughout all the manifestations of the universe. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Another quotation by Meister Eckhart is worthy of consideration. “In this barren Godhead activity has ceased and therefore the soul will be most perfect when it is thrown into the desert of the Godhead, where both activity and forms are no more, so that it is sunk and lost in this desert where its identity is destroyed.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">By the use of the words barren and desert, Eckhart is expressing a vast oneness or universal condition that is normally not accessible to the consciousness of the individual in his objective states. There seems to be a state of inactivity in these states reported by Ruysbroeck and Eckhart. They are conditions to which the individual is led through his experience in his attempt to contact a Universal Source.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">St. John the Divine bears this out when he says, “the soul must be emptied of all these imagined forms, figures and images, and it must remain in darkness in respect to these.” Again, we have the example of the individual being freed of all physical phases of consciousness and perception in order that the soul might be able to approach an area that is in contact with the universal, an area which St. John the Divine referred to as a state of darkness. We must bear in mind that St. John the Divine, while being a devout religionist, was neither a philosopher nor a scientist. He writes in a type of naive philosophy. Nevertheless, he expresses his experiences and his interpretations as he perceived them. Like Eckhart, St. John stresses the cessation of all physical activity, which would include, as far as I can interpret it, all objective thinking. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Turning from Eastern thought, the Upanishads, and from Christian mystics, we find one who was not associated, as far as we know, with either. Plotinus, who might be considered as a mystic philosopher, lived in the third century A.D. While he was familiar with Christianity, he neither supported nor adopted it in any way. We do not know to what extent he may have been familiar with the mystics of the far East, or the writings as expressed, for example, in the Upanishads. We do know that he was thoroughly familiar with and a believer in the metaphysics of Plato. He expounded a mystical theory based upon Plato’s philosophy which has stood the test of time and has been respected because of his thorough grounding in philosophy. He was one of the great philosophers of the early Christian era who was not in any way associated with the Christian movement. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Like others, Plotinus also refers to a condition of the pure ego, that is, the oneness of self. He wrote, for example, “Our self seeing there is a communication with the self restored to its purity. No doubt we should not speak of seeing but, instead of seeing the seer, speak boldly of a simple unity. For in this seeing we neither distinguish nor are there two. The man is merged with the supreme, one with it. Only in separation is there duality. This is why the vision baffles telling; for how can a man bring back tidings of the supreme as detached when he has seen it as one with himself. Beholder was one with beheld. He is become the unity, having no diversity either in relation to himself or in anything else. Reason is in abeyance and intellection, and the very self, caught away, God possessed, in perfect stillness, all the being calmed. This is the life of gods and of godlike and blessed men -- liberation from the alien that besets us here, a life taking no pleasure in the things of the earth -- a flight of the alone to the Alone.”</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Stacey quotes this passage as another classic example of the introvertive mystical experience and shows that it contains the common experience that is found in all cultures and under all circumstances. Transcendence of the duality of the subject and the object, that is, going beyond the objective, everyday self, is emphasized in this statement by Plotinus. We find here not only the classic example of the meaning of a mystical experience but the interpretation by a competent philosopher who is able to convey the importance of the individual being able to contact the source of all things, as stated in his statement of the flight from the alone to the Alone. We might say, instead, to the awareness of the universal self. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A further example of this same principle is found in another area. The Moslem mystic, Al Ghazzali, states, “When the mystic enters the true and absolute unicity of the One and the Alone, mortals reach the end of their ascent. For there is no ascent beyond it since ascent involves multiplicity implying an ascent from somewhere to somewhere, and when the multiplicity has been eliminated, Unity is established and the relationship ceases.” This is another outstanding example of the oneness of all things and that the mystical experience brings an association with the oneness. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">While it is said that Judaism is the least mystical of the theistic religions, insofar as its associates have attempted to relate themselves to mysticism, there is a statement made by one of the Hasidic mystics as follows: “There are those who serve God with their human intellects and others whose gaze is fixed on Nothing. He who is granted the supreme experience loses the reality of his intellect, but when he returns from such contemplation to the intellect, he finds it full of divine and inflowing splendor.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Again we have the example of the mystic moving toward a full realization of the greatness and unification of the divine as expressed in the universe. Furthermore, in this quotation we find that as the individual returns from such a mystical experience or contemplation, it is in his interpretation that he finds it a manifestation of the divine. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">While Buddhism is not a theistic religion, there are in some phases of it indications of mystical states and mystical experience, as shown by the statement, “In its aspects of enlightenment, mind essence is free from all manner of individuation and discriminative thinking.” Even among the Buddhists there are those who have had experiences that have left them with the realization that the universe is one and that there is a force manifesting through all of it.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In all of those quotations and statements of experience, we find repeatedly this approach to a universal oneness, and in finding it, a loss of individuality, that is, the individuality of the objective, human self. The mystic is searching for a relationship with the force that religion has called God, but which is a universal manifestation that functions through all things. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Again, we refer to Plotinus, who stated, “You ask how can we know the infinite? I answer, not by reason. It is the office of reason to distinguish and define. The infinite therefore cannot be ranked among its objects. You can only apprehend the infinite by entering into a state in which you are finite self no longer. This is the liberation of your mind from finite consciousness. When you thus cease to be finite you become one with the infinite. You realize this union, this identity.” So it is that the mystic believes that there is a possibility not only of grasping and understanding to a degree the universal oneness but that it can be entered into, that the finite can so relate itself to the infinite that the individual mystic can become one with it. The mystical experience, therefore, is an absorption into in finite being. It is a degree of experience in which the individual becomes associated with the ultimate force of all things. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Stacey summarizes the common characteristics of the extrovertive and introvertive mystical experiences. He finds that there are certain common characteristics in both types of experience. These are, as he lists them, (1) a sense of objectivity or reality, (2) blessedness and peace, (3) a feeling of holy, sacred, or divine, (4) paradoxicality, (5) alleged by the mystics to be ineffable, even though afterward in their interpretation they record or tell their interpretation in words. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There are these common characteristics, but there are also differences. Stacey states that in the extrovertive experience there is a unifying vision. All things are one, as illustrated by Eckhart looking out and seeing that all the things he perceived seemed to have a oneness flowing through them. Stacey also states that the extrovertive experience is the more concrete apprehension of the one as an intersubjectivity or life in all things. The mystic sees this oneness within himself.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The introvertive experience, on the other hand, expresses, according to Stacey’s classification, a unitary consciousness, the one, the void, the pure consciousness which is entered into by the participating mystic. It is also nonspatial and nontemporal. That is, it is completely a condition which exists when all the physical aptitudes are eliminated. The outward and inward become the same. Again, there is the expression of oneness. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Regardless of their classification, all these experiences include awareness. The individual is aware of a condition which he later can interpret. It is a true experience, just as the worldly experiences which make up our daily life are true. Critics may say that the interpretation is affected by the imagination and the introspection of the individual who reports the experience. This is true. The interpretation may differ from the actual experience, but it is the best the individual can do to express that which seems to be ineffable. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Insofar as introspection is concerned, we know that modern psychology has not emphasized the importance of introspection as did the philosopher William James. Nevertheless, William James was able to advance a system of psychology that was based upon introspection and had validity which is still in use and can be applied today. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The basic psychological characteristic of all mystical experience includes the unification of the individual mind with the universal mind. Regardless of how we may try to classify types of different experiences and interpretations of different individuals, there is manifest a transcendence of the individual’s thinking or mental content over day-to-day experience. The ultimate mystical experience is that of union with the divine, of the ability to perceive, in a degree, at least, a relationship between the individual self and the universal self or One.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
