<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-17</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-17" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">CHAPTER XII</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-12" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor011"></a>Personal Illumination</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">I</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">n the statement </span>by Dr. R. M. Bucke, referred to earlier, he gave an account of a mystical experience that developed into a state of illumination. According to his report, the experience was sudden and overwhelming. It took possession of his entire consciousness, and in fact not only affected him momentarily but continued to be a major influence during his entire lifetime. Similar experiences have been reported by others. Records of such experiences have not been common, but nevertheless such experiences have been reported by a sufficient number of individuals with such conviction that we cannot doubt their validity. One example well known among Christians was that of St. Paul. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Illumination as a result of the mystical experience is actually the involvement of the mental processes of the individual to the extent that the mind is enlightened. Such enlightenment is not, however, merely an intellectual acquisition. In this type of enlightenment, the individual has contacted a higher source, becoming aware of intuitive knowledge directly from the Cosmic. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The Rosicrucian Manual states, “Rosicrucians distinguish illumination from knowledge. The former is apperceptive or clear understanding, as well as a mere accumulation of ideas gained from experience.” The reported experiences of mystics bear out this concept. Not only is there an emotional experience that has a profound effect on the individual and upon that individual’s thinking, but actual knowledge is attained, knowledge that can be tapped, as it were, and used to direct experiences that occur in the future. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">As previously mentioned, experiences of a less dramatic nature may be the basis by which great discoveries and inventions have come about. The attainment of intuitive knowledge which has gradually been absorbed into objective consciousness is coordinated with knowledge and experience in such a way that the individual is able to carry out plans, achievements, and accomplishments not possible other wise. For example, the philosophy of Plotinus was com pared with the branches of a tree. His beliefs and doctrines grew out of the central knowledge of his objective realization, training, and experience associated with the knowledge he received through mystic channels, that is, the experience that related him to a higher source. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In some of his commentaries, Plotinus explains how such an experience goes beyond a mere intellectual approach. It is a condition supplemented by the feelings associated with the aesthetic. With reference to those who have had intuitive experiences that have led them to the threshold of mysticism, he says, “their souls are suffused with beauty, they thereafter cannot look merely at life’s surface. Theirs is a profound inner vision, of the divine being. Thus possessed of God, the man has only to look to the image of divinity within and he sees himself uplifted, gifted with the nobler beauty. However beautiful that image may be, let him leave it aside, for it is of the world of separation; rather let him sink into the identity with the divine. Then he is one with God, experiencing in silence the presence.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">According to Plotinus, we have here an illustration of the emotional and intellectual component of the mystical experience, a combination which is a key to the philosophy to which he subscribed and which begins in happiness. The philosophic life that he prescribed is therefore the life that finds the good, and in finding the good, it finds God. This, we must remember, is the statement of Plotinus, who is frequently referred to as the last pagan mystic. This reference, of course, is made to contrast him to the mystics of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam who became more prominent during the Middle Ages.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The experience of Dr. Bucke and probably the experience of many others who have had a sudden illumination are typical examples of extrovertive mystical experiences to which I have referred. The experience comes about in a manner that might have appeared to be objective. In fact, Dr. Bucke confused the experience with the possibility that there was a fire in the city where the experience took place. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Such an experience seemingly comes about without any particular preparation or anticipation. The extrovertive mystical experience is frequently spontaneous in its occurrence or in the participation of the individual with the intuitive knowledge flowing into his consciousness. This, however, does not mean that no background was ever provided for such an experience. In some manner, life has touched upon an area which has made the individual responsive to this type of condition. In the experience of Dr. Bucke and a similar experience referred to by Eckhart, we are aware that they had an immediate experience, but we also know that their lives prepared them for the reception of such an experience. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The introvertive mystical experience, being an awareness of identification between the self and the universal core or oneness, is slightly different. Seldom have we found records of it except where an individual has developed to the point of being able to participate in such an experience. Reference was made to an experience of Santa Teresa, in which she refers to the fact that she had an experience after many hours of prayer and meditation. This is typical of the types of mystical experience given to us by the mystics of the East. They followed disciplined procedures in their philosophical and religious practices that prepared them for the ability to experience and recognize a mystical experience when it occurred. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Illumination that carries with it knowledge from a higher source than that obtained through the physical senses is one that we must prepare for, just as we prepare for anything else. A consistent and established set of graded studies and exercises are needed in order for us to be able to grasp such an experience should it occur. One of the fundamental purposes of the Rosicrucian philosophy is to teach a procedure by which individuals gradually develop their Inner Self and make acute their own consciousness to the intuitive urges that can penetrate their mind and become a part of their philosophy and of their ability to use the intuitive knowledge that is the mystical experience. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">As in all techniques, practice is essential. One does not learn to swim or play a musical instrument by reading a book. Neither does one learn to recognize and interpret an introvertive mystical experience merely by reading the experience of others, or reading a manual that might explain procedures that would be helpful. Techniques in any process are developed by directing oneself conscientiously and consistently to the practice of those procedures which will bring about the perfection of the technique. Playing scales on a piano, for example, may not sound like great music, but great music is not produced until after a degree of perfection is attained through the practice of these techniques.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The potential for the mystical experience and eventual illumination lies within all human beings. It is not a condition that has to be acquired through education alone, but also through practice. As stated before, a technique is obtained not alone by knowledge but by consistency of application of knowledge. There are moments in the life of all of us who are not controlled entirely by a materialistic philosophy when we feel uplifted beyond ourselves, when the walls of sense and objective thought fall away, and when we know we are in touch with an ultimate force. They are the supreme moments of our earthly existence. One such vision is worth all the verbal descriptions that others may have made of mystical experience and phenomena that have ever been written or that have been painted with the artist’s brush or sounded by the genius of a musician.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Such moments of illumination are not simply the exclusive possession of the advanced intellectual but are probably more often obtained by devotion than by any purely mental procedure or process, by reaching out of the Inner Self, as it were, than by a process of reasoning within the brain. We do not analyze the splendor of a sunset; we feel it. Nature is one thing through the mind and another and quite different thing, a deeper and loftier thing, through the emotions. When we feel a oneness in a state of mystical unity with the vast whole of nature, our self a star in the firmament of stars, it is then we have a testimony of the reality of universal oneness transcending all other conditions with which we deal. No matter how we reason, the objective mind cannot argue this reality away. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This, then, is the entrance into the mystical experience. Thus, illumination can be attained.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
