<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-7</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-7" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter II </p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-2" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor001"></a>Mysticism Stands Alone</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">I</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">t is my </span>personal opinion that mysticism can be classified as a phase of philosophy. At the same time, we might say that every science, subject, or discipline with which the human race is familiar, or which it attempts to study, is a phase of philosophy. From philosophy have sprung the sciences and systems of thought that constitute the thinking of most present day individuals. Philosophy, as its meaning originally was given, is a love of wisdom. While the ancients studied in various areas, all were a part of philosophy. In due time, philosophy divided into various areas, some physical, some ideational, some spiritual. As a system of thought, there are many units of philosophy that can stand more or less alone, such as metaphysics, ethics, logic, and many other systems that could be enumerated in the scientific field. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Mysticism as a subject in itself can stand alone because, as already pointed out, it is the essence by which we are able to reach a source of knowledge that is otherwise unavailable. Only by mysticism can we comprehend that there lies within the scope of man’s reach an area of knowledge which is not confined to the materialistic world of the physical sciences. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In my repeated reference to the material world, to the physical sciences, and to materialism in general, I want to emphasize that I am in no way attempting to depreciate the value and importance of materialism. One of the fundamental principles taught by the Rosicrucians is that one of the greatest achievements an individual can make is to attain harmony. By that we mean balance. For the individual to be able to live in such a way that all important phases of life and existence are harmoniously related to each other is fundamental in this philosophy. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We cannot fail to acknowledge that there is a material and an immaterial world, that there is a world of thought and a world of action, a world of material and a world of ideas. They are all important. It is impossible to eliminate one without restricting the value of one or more of the others. Therefore, materialism is an important phase of our lives, an important phase of our thinking. The only problem that exists with materialism is that at the present time, and in fact in most of man’s history, materialism has been overly emphasized. It has become the supreme phase of existence, rather than one of many phases.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The accumulation of material objects, the accumulation of wealth, and the accumulation of material or scientific knowledge have superseded all other activities of man to the point that materialism has become out of balance with man’s other potentialities. A balance between materialism and idealism, between all other unrelated conditions with which we must cope in life, is the ideal way to look at this matter in general. Therefore, any reference to materialism that appears to be a criticism is a criticism of an over-emphasis, not a criticism of the area of thought itself. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Mysticism, as will be examined in more detail later, lies in the area of idealism. It springs from the world of ideas. It cannot be restricted to the material world. In fact, only by its results in men’s behavior can we find a relationship that would justify classifying mysticism in any way with a material condition or substance. Mysticism does not treat the material world, just as physics does not treat the mystical world. They are separate, and yet they can be harmoniously balanced within the lives of individuals, as many scientists and philosophers have well illustrated by their own lives, having reached a balance and understanding of both. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In terms of definition, I defined mysticism in previous writings as “a doctrine that the knowledge of reality, truth, or God is attainable by direct knowledge.” In this definition I used the word God. That word can be substituted with other words and still carry the same concept. I used the word simply because it is understandable by most individuals, but what I mean in the definition is that mysticism is a source of knowing the ultimate, whatever that may be. Call it God, call it the Divine, call it the Cosmic, call it the Transcendental, or the Absolute, it makes no difference what term is used. It is, as I have already pointed out, the basis of life, the fundamental part of our being that is real and is related to a force that supersedes and transcends everything else in the entire universe. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the popular sense, mysticism and religion are usually accepted as being related to each other, but I wish to deny the principle that mysticism and religion can in any way be considered to be synonymous. I was somewhat surprised to read in an accepted dictionary of philosophy published by the Philosophical Library the following definition of mysticism: “Mysticism in its simplest and most essential meaning is a type of religion which puts the emphasis on immediate awareness of relation with God, direct and intimate consciousness of divine presence. It is religion in the most acute, intense, and living stage.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">To me it is doubly surprising that a reliable dictionary of philosophy should define the word mysticism in such a manner. If mysticism is truly a religion or a phase of religion, its definition technically does not even belong in a dictionary of philosophy. It should have been omitted altogether. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I disagree emphatically that religion and philosophy are so related that they cannot be separated. I cannot agree that mysticism must always be considered as a phase of religion. Nevertheless, it has been a common assumption of many individuals who have studied or written on the subject that mysticism is a religious phenomenon. I believe that part of this is traceable to the fact that there were, have been, and probably still are many individuals with profound religious beliefs who are mystics. This being the case, it has been generally accepted that all mystics are of a devout religious nature associated with some specific religion, because many of the religious mystics have also been great writers. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Much of the literature on mysticism that exists today has been written by individuals associated directly with a religious movement, denomination, or organization. The Western religions, particularly Christianity, have emphasized this fact. Many Christian writers of a mystical inclination have left these records, but this does not mean there were no mystics for hundreds of years, or even thousands, before Christianity even existed. It is impossible to conceive that during the period prior to the existence of Christianity there were no mystics. Christianity existed as an organized institution about two hundred years after the time of Christ. In spite of the accumulation of knowledge that man has attained in the present century, it is inconceivable to think of Christianity having dominance over or even controlling the concept of mysticism. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Most mystics who were members of a Christian organization related the mystical consciousness as being a state of union with God. This is not always the essence of the mystical definition, although the same experience has been repeatedly given or interpreted non-theistically in Buddhism. Furthermore, Plotinus, who also wrote on mysticism as a mystic, was not associated with any religion which we know of today. His system of thought and experience was philosophy, and yet his mysticism and his report of mystical experiences are in essence as substantial and as important as any of those given by religious leaders. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The state of mystical consciousness does not necessarily come through association with any one world religion. It is a state of consciousness that exists independent of any system of religious thought. The mystical experience of an individual arises within the inner consciousness and is not necessarily related to an association with any group or organization. However, the experience may be interpreted to a degree in terms of such a relationship because the person was associated with a particular group or a particular religion and expressed the mystical experience in terms of the vocabulary of the religion with which this individual was associated.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Frankly, I agree with some other writers on the subject who question whether or not Jesus himself was a mystic. He was a teacher and became the founder of a great theistic religion, but his statements, as they are recorded in the literature that we have, give little indication of any mystical tendency. In all of the Christian writings we find that the strongest tendency toward mysticism is in the Gospel of St. John, which we are confident was written a good many years after the time of Jesus himself. It was probably the writer who was mystically inclined and not those about whom he wrote. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Christianity has become a mystical religion to a degree because of the interpretation of various adherents to the organized Christianity that has developed from the teachings as they were handed down to us and not by the statements Jesus himself made. The historical Jesus does not seem to have uttered many phrases that could be considered as having their roots in mysticism. On the other hand, the teachings of Buddha and the teachings found in the Hindu religions are more closely related to the individual’s belief in the relationship that exists harmoniously between the Inner Self of the individual and the Ultimate Source of all things, the oneness of being to which all mystics refer. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It might also be remembered that of all the leading Western religions, Judaism is the least mystical of the three great theistic religions, Christianity, Islam, and Judaism, as well as many other religions. Jesus was born and, as a child, was reared as a Jew. Therefore, he was not exposed to the teachings of mysticism as early in life, as was, for example, Buddha. Mohammed, too, was associated with those groups in the East and became familiar with the important relationship that can exist between the self and the ultimate source of all knowledge. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The mysticism in Christianity can be traced more directly to Greek philosophy, rather than to the originator of the religion itself. As I explained before, this is not a criticism of religion. It is simply a statement that mysticism can stand alone, that it is a means of reaching, without the use of the physical senses, into an area of wisdom, knowledge, and inspiration that goes beyond the grasp of the physical being. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I am fully in accord with the statement of W. T. Stacey, who wrote, “The general conclusion regarding the relations between mysticism on the one hand and the area of organized religions on the other is that mysticism is independent of all of them in the sense that it can exist without any of them. But mysticism and organized religion tend to be associated with each other and to become linked together because they look beyond earthly horizons to the infinite and eternal, and because both share the emotions appropriate to the sacred and the holy.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There are many ways that our emotions enter into all phases of life. To be influenced by what we hold sacred or look upon as being holy is to be influenced by the highest forces of the universe. These bring about an emotional response which is peculiar to the human being and which makes it possible for him or her to be so associated with forces that lie beyond the ordinary scope of day-to-day routine so that he or she is able to rise above the cares and demands of everyday living. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We strive to master our environment, to be greater than our physical selves. We hope to be able to conceive those thoughts and subscribe to those ideals that raise consciousness to a level where we can be truly human and rise out of the realm of the vegetable or the lower animal. This is the significance of mysticism. It stands alone in that it can be the key. It can be the way toward relating ourselves to ultimate reality, to truth, to goodness, to love, and to the understanding of all that lies beyond the reach of our physical senses. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
