<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-9</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-9" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter IV </p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-4" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor003"></a>Lives of the Mystics</span> </p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">I</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">t is not </span>my purpose to present a history or biography of those considered to be mystics but rather to direct attention to certain fundamentals that are common to the lives of all mystics. This may make it possible for us to understand the message taught to us by their lives. Although it is true that there are many biographies of mystics, there are also many mystics whose lives have gone unrecorded. We know nothing about them. We do not know who they were or who they may be today.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We do not know the scope of their experiences or exactly what it was that they had contributed or are contributing to the welfare of humanity and to the world in general. We do know that these individuals have existed. We know that they lived in centuries that were torn apart by economic and political upheavals, that brought devastating wars to the people of many lands, and that had many other adverse effects upon the general welfare and activities of human beings. In looking about us, we can only conclude that the circumstances of life today are in many ways better than they were in many other periods of the past.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We seem to have advanced in spite of the physical difficulties that have been man’s burden to bear. Therefore, I hold this principle to be a degree of proof that the lives of the mystics, known and unknown, have so contributed to the universal knowledge and experience of all human beings that a degree of balance has been maintained. They have consciously or unconsciously influenced every living human being and influence each of us today, even if we are not conscious of the exact way in which that influence takes place, or exactly how it affects the thinking and actions of each of us.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In an excellent biography written some years ago entitled Men Who Have Walked with God, Sheldon Cheney examines the lives and philosophies of selected mystics from ancient to modern times. His presentation makes it possible for us to have a general picture of the ideas that these individuals have contributed to the history and welfare of mankind.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">He also explains his own philosophy in his commentaries on the general principles of mysticism. For example, he says, “there are many men who believe that the apprehension of spiritual values in mortal things is the real substance of living.” There is an effectiveness resulting from the lives of those individuals who have looked toward the higher values in the universe, have attempted to teach them, and furthermore, as a result of their own lives, have made those principles applicable to the lives of all human beings as they exist today. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Cheney further emphasizes the importance of mysticism in the life of every individual. He states, “Mysticism is pure spiritual experience, the actuality of vision, the foretaste of the soul’s perfect rest.” He goes on to say that one of the purposes of mysticism is “to illuminate everyday living with the light of divine understanding. I conceive the mystic life to be less a forsaking of reality than a search to discover that which gives the lustre of reality to all; and, after the mental discovery, a constant detection of eternal values in every object and facet of mortal life.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">These quotations give us a picture of the all-over principle of mysticism functioning in the mortal world, where men and women partake of the experiences of the physical environment and yet are capable of drawing upon the experience of the Absolute within their own lives. Furthermore, we are capable of drawing upon and sharing the experience of the mystics who have lived and who have made some record of their ideas and philosophy as these ideas have evolved as a result of the mystics’ contact with higher forces. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Today, however, many of the principles that have been taught by those in the past have been commercialized and used for personal gain. If some of those who reached the state we designate as masters should enter certain meetings held in their names today, they would be amazed, to express it mildly, at the procedures they would witness, the demonstrations and exercises that are performed for the purpose of bringing humanity into contact with them. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In examining a few of the traits or life characteristics of the masters to whom we refer as mystics, we shall not only become familiar with their lives, purposes, and ideals, but we shall also gain a better understanding of what constitutes a mystic. One of the outstanding traits exemplified in an individual who seeks mastership is presented in one of the early degrees of the Rosicrucian philosophy, and that is making the ego or personal “I” secondary to the real “I” or Inner Self. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">According to all natural and mystical laws, as development of a psychic nature increases, as we become more aware of our subjective selves, the thoughts of self, the thoughts of personal glory diminish in direct proportion to inner growth. Inversely, personal development is not attained until we overcome the dominance of the objective self, which is concerned entirely with the material world which surrounds us. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Many who were considered mystics gave up the life that seemed to be obvious. This was particularly true in the case of Buddha and may also be true to a degree in the case of Jesus and Mohammed. These individuals did not concern themselves with their personal desires or wishes in the physical world but devoted themselves to the propagation of the message which they had developed as a result of their inner experience. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Mystics bring into the world of common experience the ideals which were theirs in the world of the Inner Self. They devote themselves to a life that expresses the forcefulness of the power that exists outside their physical abilities and characteristics and makes it possible for them to devote their efforts to ideals so important to them that they can give up all the material values which may have been offered to them. In this trait of devotion we also find many other characteristics  of the mystical life. Although it is impossible to segregate and examine them one at a time, we analyze them as all a part of a great zeal or determination to live fully. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">With devotion we find the element of sacrifice. Every great mystic, every teacher who has attempted to teach man to live had met the great demand of sacrifice. There has come across the path of all who attempted to minister to mankind the shadow of the cross. As far as their earthly existence was concerned, the lives of the mystics have frequently ended in crucifixion, either literally or figuratively. We see devotion to an ideal which is not of a material nature. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We see love of a principle so deep that the physical discomforts are insufficient to destroy the love of ideals that are not material but which hold the key to a fuller life. For each of these individuals life became not only a physical existence but one in which his very being, the mind with which he taught, caused his soul to expand and embrace the Cosmic Mind and the Universal Soul of which it originally was a part. Such a life illustrates the complete attainment of Cosmic Consciousness. Devotion, sacrifice, and love seem to be the triangle of qualities and characteristics upon which the ministrations of these teachers were built.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">However, they did not live in an imaginary world, as some today would have us believe. We therefore turn to the actual, earthly existence of these people to consider for a moment how they lived. We find that with all the development and abilities of the mystic, such an individual was still a rational, human being. It is logical to presume that if we met a great mystic today, we would find him to be very much a human being in all our contacts with him. It is quite possible that we have met a mystic at various times in our lives, that there are among us those who have attained great understanding and mastery, but the ones who have come nearest to living the life of a mystic are those who do not flaunt or attempt to make known to their fellow man the qualities or super qualities in their development. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Certain forces and powers have become part of the existence of these individuals, not as gifts but through effort, through knowledge, and through application of their understanding of the laws of the universe and nature. These forces are to be purposefully directed, as they have been in the past by other mystics, pointing the way to the eventual attainment of a status of life on the part of mankind that will reunite him with the source from which he sprang. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Then we might ask, “What is a mystic? What is the eventual attainment that mankind should seek?” Both of these questions have been defined in various phrases and in many forms of terminology. In the present age we find the term mystic interpreted in so many different ways that it is often difficult for us to grasp for ourselves the complete meaning. It is not easy to put into words just what the mystic is. After all, the mystic is a human being, no different from other human beings. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In fact, we are all potential mystics. We have the foundation upon which to build in order to be all that the mystic can be. Mystics of the past taught that the ultimate attainment of man is to reunite himself with the Absolute from which he came. However, religious creeds have become so confused with theological doctrines of salvation and redemption that what is vital or would benefit man is frequently lost in the dim recesses of theological dogma. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Can we believe that man’s ultimate attainment is the process of the outer man, that it is the process of reciting creeds decided upon by other men, or the performance of a ceremony, the real meaning of which may not be evident at all to the majority of participants? Attainment and growth as offered by the mystics was not a formula, not an idle ritual in which people participated while wondering what the real meaning of it was. Instead, it was a ritual in which man was brought closer in communion with the Cosmic host, so that he might raise his true being, his own soul, above the level of his physical existence and bring it into contact with the source which would so nourish it that the soul itself would realize its potential power, its domination over the body, and its part to play in the Cosmic scheme. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Through such an insight as this, and this alone, can the message of the mystics be heard and the lives of the mystics continue to live in the lives of us today. When we too have lifted our being to the point of full embrace with the great Cosmic scheme, we shall find that the bitter problems which now so involve us in our social, political, and economic life will be of very small importance in comparison to the true life which we should be able to live if we will but see through the eyes of the Inner Self. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
