<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-20</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-20" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter XV</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-15" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor014"></a>Beyond Mysticism</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">B</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">eyond mysticism lies </span>a new world that we have not even dreamed of insofar as to what its potentialities might be. There also lies a concept of aesthetics, ethics, and immortality that is not in an area commonly associated with our routine daily thinking. As we well know, we have lived through a long period of materialistic dominance and materialistic development. If we review in our mind the history of the past few centuries, for example, we can readily appreciate the radical changes that have taken place in the material world and in our immediate physical environment. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">An individual who lived ten centuries ago could not grasp the environment of today because of material conditions to which we hardly give a second thought. Good examples are found in the fields of communication and transportation. Conditions that could not have been conceived even a few hundred years ago now are commonplace. We accept these things because we are in the habit of using them. Seldom do we pause to consider the amazing benefits that we enjoy and that have resulted from man’s material achievements. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">What we also fail to realize is that there must be at some time an end to man’s material achievements. Material is limited. A physical unit of any kind cannot be infinite, cannot exist forever. A time must come when man’s physical achievements are substantially completed, when his evolutionary process, as far as physical change is concerned, is brought to an end. Then, we ask, which way will we go? That will be the time when man will be forced to change his direction, when the human race will have to realize that the next period of great achievement in life and environment must lie in the field of the mind or in the area of the Inner Self. This development is what will be the area beyond our present concept of mysticism. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The future potential of mysticism is to develop through the experience of mysticism and to understand the now considered mysteries of the universe. The answers to the questions that every human being has asked for all time -- purpose, immortality, growth, and life itself -- will become explainable, not only in terms of man’s material development but in terms of his ability to harness the mystical experience in such a way that he will draw upon the source of all knowledge and of all of the faculties of the universe and apply them to daily living. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Beyond mysticism, therefore, lies the key to the future - a future unencumbered by any physical limitation, unencumbered by any lack of knowledge, a future that will contain for all men all knowledge of the universe, and the answers to all questions that have ever been asked. This would seem an impossible situation now, because it cannot be completed, cannot be developed in terms of a physical universe. The future must lie outside that area.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Stacey illustrates this point by referring to an experience by the British poet John Masefield. He does not classify this under the terminology that he applies to other reported mystical experiences. In fact, he refers to it as a borderline case. I sometimes question the division of mystical experience into various degrees, but no doubt there is reasonable evidence that such facts exist, because the experience differs with the individual, with the individual’s preparation, and with the individual’s point of view. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Regardless of how we classify it, John Masefield tells that he had arrived at a title of a poem he intended to write but was unable to write it. One day, while taking a walk, he suddenly saw the poem appear before him in a completed form. He states that the poem was complete in every detail. He had only to return to his desk and write it as if he were copying it. The experience made a tremendous impression upon him. In reporting the experience, Masefield says, “This illumination is an intense experience so wonderful that it cannot be described. While it lasts a momentary problem is merged into a dazzlingly clear perception of the entire work in all its detail. In a moment of mental ecstasy the writer perceives what seems to be an unchangeable way of statement.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Masefield then comments that he knew of cases where other artists have had similar experiences, and that a completed art form has taken place, or taken shape, in an instantaneous perception. He goes on to say, “It is a perception by a mortal of an undying reality from which all beauty, good, wisdom, and rightness come to man. Certainly to myself this last is the explanation that this universe of glory and energy exists and that man may in some strange way enter into it and partake of its nature.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">As Stacey makes clear, Masefield was not considered to be a mystic in the sense we normally think of one. He made no claim to unusual mystical abilities, but yet he acknowledged the experience to which I have referred, and furthermore, states that he is not the only one who has had such an experience. This indicates the future possibilities which I have already mentioned, that the area beyond mysticism will be a human area in which the human being will be capable of drawing upon the Ultimate Source of all knowledge and thereby will be able to live fully and completely and to form a new world based upon the inspiration of his own experience in contact with the Absolute instead of living only restricted by the limitations of the material world.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">So it is that man has the opportunity to move forward, to move into a new area of existence, an area based upon what would now be considered immaterial, and an area of which we know very little. Only those who have had the mystical experience, who have been in contact with the source of the universe, with the core of eternal being, and who have had glimpses of such a condition realize the magnitude of these possibilities. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">To a degree, this conforms to the Buddhist concept of immortality. The Buddhist claims that upon attaining nirvana, he has also attained immortality. Immortality is not restricted to a state beyond the period of physical life. It is a condition rather than a state of being. It is to be attained through the mind and through the Inner Self, rather than only through a physical change. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Immortality begins when man grasps the significance of his own life and the source of that life. It may be that in this new world where man will live, his life governed by laws that are not restricted or limited to the physical, material universe in which we now dwell, he may grasp the full meaning of immortality and better prepare himself for its realization here and now, instead of looking forward to a state that he cannot now prove exists or does not exist. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We can believe in immortality, but the potential also lies within us to experience that immortality by being conscious of the perceptions that come through the Inner Self from the source of the Absolute. Immortality as we now understand it is a condition to which we refer at the close of physical life. Since consciousness is so closely related to physical life, we are unable to describe and understand the significance of immortality because of our close ties with the life we now lead - but time can change this. Time will be cut short by man becoming aware now of his mystical potential. That is the key. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The great values to which man can aspire that will contribute to this development are goodness, truth, and beauty. Goodness, we have been told, is a reflection of the Absolute. Some mystics, many philosophers, and some religionists make good and God identical. Truth is the awareness of the fact that man lives in an environment that is limited physically but unlimited if he will but extend his consciousness to take into consideration the fact that other areas exist. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Beauty is a prelude to the mystical experience. It registers upon consciousness in a way that affects our emotional stability. It makes us feel that we are sensing something that lies beyond our immediate grasp. All have had at some time in their lives experiences that lie in this field. They are difficult to describe because they are so closely related to the mystical experience that they are to a degree ineffable. All who have enjoyed the experience of beauty, however faint, realize these experiences for what they are. They may be a view of a sunset, the hearing of a piece of music as we walk down the street, or a great view from a high point looking over a large area. They might also include the act of heroism, or self-sacrifice made by a fellow human being. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Our normal material existence has a tendency to limit these experiences. We are so involved with making a living and adjusting to our environment that the moments of aesthetic enjoyment are rare, and to a certain extent, surprising. They occur so suddenly that sometimes beauty takes us by surprise. In the sudden view or the hearing of the beautiful we find that the aesthetic appreciation seems to supersede the existence of space and time. While such an experience lasts, it lifts us out of the general area of mortal struggle and conflicts in which most of our daily lives are passed. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Such an experience will be rather short and will have a certain tantalizing character about it. We are at once gladdened by the experience and disappointed that the veil which hid it from us is lifted so suddenly that what was clear seems to have passed and there remains only a sense of nostalgia, the wish that the aesthetic experience that was ours could remain and that the vision which we saw could be maintained over a period of time.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Only the great mystics have been able to hold and control such experiences. The highest aesthetic and mystical experiences lie so close at hand and yet so shut out from our daily experience that we fail to appreciate them until after they have momentarily impressed themselves upon our consciousness. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In reference to these experiences, the British philosopher C.E.M. Joad said, “These characteristics of our highest experiences, characteristics of aesthetic experience though they are by no means confined to aesthetics are I believe, most plausibly to be explained on the assumption that in them we obtain a fleeting glimpse, a foretaste, as it were, of the nature of that reality which is God. Insofar as I can conceive the notion of immortality it is under the guise of a mode of existence in which what in these experiences is precarious is made secure, what is secure is made clear, and what is fleeting is made eternal.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The mystical experience is the experience in which a human being has the potentiality to be able to grasp knowledge beyond his physical capacity. We can all participate and find in this experience a reflection of the nature of the Absolute and a glimpse of eternity, so that we need question no more. We will then have attained immortality. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
