<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-13</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-13" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter VIII</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-8" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor007"></a>Mysticism: A Basis of Idealism</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">T</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">he word idealism </span>has many meanings. In philosophy, the particular meaning is indicated by the context or by the modifying terms such as platonic idealism, ethical idealism, objective idealism, subjective idealism, and other forms of terminology, depending upon the particular meaning that is intended. Idealism is also used in a popular sense. An individual who possesses and practices a high degree of moral standards and tries to carry out these principles is often spoken of as idealistic. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">While there are many idealistic applications in philosophy, practically all the theories agree in two fundamental ways. These agreements are that all idealistic theories consider the mind or the function of the mind as the principal basis of reality. The theories also agree in that they are opposed to materialism. In fact, they are the very opposite of materialism. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The view that the universe consists solely of material objects, or matter in motion, under the direction of mechanical law, is fundamental to the metaphysical theory of materialism. Materialism is, therefore, exactly opposite to the fundamental concept of idealism, which, generally speaking, is the theory that puts emphasis upon the non-material world. Idealism stands for the principle that the real and fundamental part of the universe is mental rather than material. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In connection with the relationship between mysticism and idealism, it may be of help to give some consideration to the meaning of objective and subjective idealism. Both forms concern themselves primarily with the mental world. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Objective idealism is based on the theory that both the subject and the object of knowledge are equally real and equally manifestations of the Absolute or the ideal. In this theory, the world we perceive is substantially of the nature that we find in our own perception of it. We ourselves are also, insofar as the body is concerned, of the same nature as that which we perceive. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Subjective idealism, on the other hand, is based upon the principle that the knowledge of the world exists only in the mind. For the subjective idealist, only our perception is real. What we perceive is what we believe to exist outside of us, but actually nothing exists except our own perception. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There are modifications of the various schools of thought in relation to both objective and subjective idealism. We need not, at this particular point, go into more detail in regard to the fine points of difference upon this basic subject. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Not all who accept idealism as a means of explaining the world or the universe accept mysticism. To put it another way, not all idealists are mystics. Idealism can be accepted, particularly in its form of objective idealism, in the same manner that the materialist accepts the universe. The objective idealist accepts the universe as an existing entity, as an actuality existing separately from the mind of the perceiver. We are able to perceive it through our physical senses. Therefore, there are many idealists, probably as many as there are materialists, although in the world today, materialism has a tendency to be emphasized because of the substantial advancement of material sciences in the last few centuries. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Most of the mystics of whom we have record have been idealists. It is logical the idealism would be the basic philosophical principle that the mystic could accept. The mystic looks within himself. He receives intuitive impressions. He has the various mystical experiences that bring to his consciousness information, knowledge, and the basis of experience which is not in any way necessarily associated with the physical world perceived through physical senses. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Mysticism, therefore, is the expression of idealism for the individual who holds to the principle that insight and intuition are of equal importance as a source of knowledge as is the impression that comes from any physical sense or the conclusions reached through the analysis of memory, experience, and use of reason. The mystic usually upholds the concept of idealism as a metaphysical explanation of the real. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">From time to time, idealism has been dominated by materialism. In such periods of history, those who accepted mysticism have influenced the general trend of thought of the particular age. Mysticism has been a force at these times that has subjected materialism to constant analysis, and therefore caused many individuals to think in terms of idealism. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I even go so far as to consider that if it were not for the mystics, religion and the idealistic forms of philosophy and metaphysics might not have survived various materialistic ages. Without the modifying influence of mysticism, the acceptance of materialism would have become more universal, and all forms of idealism would have been subjugated to the control of those who had no other philosophy than that of materialism. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There have been periods when idealism has been dominant and other periods when the voice of mysticism has been relatively quiet. Idealism can exist without mysticism, but mysticism does not exist with out idealism. After all, mysticism makes idealism function or become an applicable and usable formula or theory. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We might therefore conclude that mysticism strengthens the concept of idealism by first giving it substance. The mystically inclined individual draws upon a source of knowledge and power to play upon the circumstances of his life and his environment. In doing so, he is constantly emphasizing the fundamental principles of idealism. He causes idealism to be more realistic in his own mind and therefore is able to teach it, either by instruction or example, to those who are overpowered or who are strongly affected by the arguments and examples of materialism. While materialism upholds the theory that it alone gives substance to the universe and to the material world, the belief and practice of the mystics add a condition which is as near substance as the idealist can approach in these theories. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The second way in which mysticism strengthens the concept of idealism is by supporting the dignity of the individual. Materialism, while possibly not intending to do so in its fundamental theory, nevertheless contributes to the idea that the physical world is dominant in the universe and therefore should receive the first consideration and the first loyalty of all who turn to philosophical speculation. The individual, therefore, becomes secondary to the materialistic concept. In the material world today there exists the tendency for the machine to replace the individual entity and the mind of that entity. In this way, the individual under the pressure of materialism becomes subordinate to the machine, to the scientific application of materialism. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">One of the forms of materialism receiving substantial support from a certain part of the world’s population today is known as diacritical materialism. This particular form of materialism is an important factor in the formation of social and political standards that are affecting many individuals today. Basically, diacritical materialism, like all forms of materialism, accounts for realism of the world in the area of the material or physical. It goes even further than other forms of materialism in that it subordinates the value of the individual. In fact, it lowers the dignity of the individual and considers the group or the society to which the individual belongs as being of more importance than the individual.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Idealism, on the other hand, stresses a degree of individualism and claims that the development of the human race will come as the result of the development of each individual. This is based upon the principle that the individual can evolve and grow closer to the source of the Absolute, which is the beginning of all manifestation and of all life. Therefore, diacritical idealism is inconsistent with all the principles upheld by the idealist, and even by many materialists. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">On the other hand, mysticism acknowledges and supports the principle that knowledge and experience are valid when they come from within as a product of the mind and not exclusively a product of the physical universe. The individual is equal to or superior, even, to anything that is material. Therefore, individual value becomes important, and the dignity of the individual is upheld and made to be something that is worth having, especially in those who, supported by the principle of mysticism, live a balanced life, acknowledging the physical world but at the same time willing to draw upon the source of knowledge and power that come through the individual mind.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The third way in which mysticism strengthens the concept of idealism is by making idealism a living factor in the life of the individual as a result of the mystical experience. The mystic who has experienced the attainment of knowledge through an experience which takes place within the self is confident of the relationship established between the Inner Self, or soul, of the individual and the absolute oneness of the universe itself. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">As is repeated many times in those who have been able to tell of the content of mystical experience, there has been the experience of universal oneness, peace, and composure. Those who experience these conditions find that life is purposeful, that it is a manifestation of the Creator, of the absolute power of the universe, which can be contacted by the individual. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In this relationship between the individual self and all the principles for which idealism stands, the principle of idealism becomes not just a theory, not just a metaphysical principle of idealism which can be discussed in philosophical systems, but a factor of life itself, a factor that contributes to the state of living and to the development of a philosophy of life. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
