<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-19</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mysticism-Ultimate-Experience-19" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="_idGenObjectStyleOverride-1">
			<p class="Header">Chapter XIV</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-14" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor013"></a>The World of the Inner Self</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">W</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">hen we open </span>the door to the world of the Inner Self, we approach an area that lies beyond philosophy, psychology, or religion. We enter what is truly within the scope of mysticism because we are approaching the point or area in which it is possible for the mystical experience to occur. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The term self is used frequently to be a state similar to that of mind. Many individuals do not differentiate between the two words but make them synonymous. As far as naive philosophy is concerned, there is practically no differentiation. They are both the part of the subject which knows and feels and wills. Whatever powers and attributes are assumed for one are usually attributed to the other.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Insofar as the content of consciousness is concerned, there is a limitation. Mind is an organization and unity of conscious content in an individual, while self is a central group within the larger organization of the mind. Our conscious organization, so to speak, is made up of many elements. We never find these elements completely isolated. For example, a sensation, a percept, a memory, a reasoning process, a feeling, an emotion, or an act of will never exists by itself. Sometimes one of these aspects of consciousness is dominant, sometimes another. Whether it is perception, memory, emotion, or reasoning, it is not the only mental state or process present at a particular moment. In each case there is more. There is a background of consciousness representing an organized and unified content which hangs together in a unique and personalized manner. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Whatever is thrown upon the screen of consciousness is projected there momentarily as a lesser content from a larger and more permanent content. No single experience stands alone in consciousness but is outlined against other experiences which lie outside the focus of attention. Sensations of our organs and of our bodies, aches and pains, marginal visual and auditory presentations, fading images of experience just past, memories of remote or recent scenes, hopes, desires, and plans for the future make up this background, which is always present in consciousness.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Each experience in consciousness overlaps the experiences which precede and follow it. There is a continuous unity in each individual stream of consciousness. As new and different experiences come about and reach consciousness, they do not come as sharp breaks but as modifications in the growing unity of experiences. The growth of the accumulative experience is so gradual that there remains a sufficient conscious background of old experience to give the whole a self-identity. There is no moment in the normal waking life where this unity, continuity and identity of conscious experiences can be disregarded. There is an organization of experience into a personal unity in which all aspects and processes of consciousness are represented. This complex organization is known as the self. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">From the standpoint of the empirical psychologist, this subject would end here. The self would be a condition that is made up of empirical experiences. Actually, there is more, there is deeper, there is a transcendental ego or subject self. To attempt to understand it, we must resort to the psychology of introspection. I cannot be familiar with the content of your consciousness, with the totality of your self, unless you in some manner, by speech and by behavior, indicate to me to a degree at least what that content is.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Self is our private being. The Inner Self and the self might be difficult to isolate, but actually the Inner Self is the condition that is frequently referred to as the subjective consciousness. That layer of consciousness lies below the level of our objective self and the perceptions, experiences, and thinking processes that are currently taking place within consciousness. From the subjective consciousness can come impulses which affect our behavior either through the functioning of the objective consciousness itself or by bringing up through the process of memory items, knowledge, and experiences which are hidden in the subjective but are able to reach into the objective consciousness and therefore become a part of our current realization of self as we experience it at any moment. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The Inner Self is related to the soul. We may even go so far as to consider the Inner Self and soul to be identical. Probably it would be better for us to presume --although this may not be a psychologically sound argument -- that the Inner Self is the self of the soul, while the outer self is the total content of objective consciousness. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The soul is the source of life, the source from which the material body is animated and made to be a living entity. The soul is derived from the source of all life and expresses itself as an individual unit incarnated in a material substance. Therefore, through it we should have a source of knowledge, a source that we should be able to contact and that would be a part of the universal one or Absolute. We can further conclude that the Inner Self is the locale of the mystical experience.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The difference is that when this knowledge of the Inner Self is impressed upon the objective consciousness, the experiencer becomes conscious of the existence of this Inner Self, which is associated with all life and all being. The resulting awareness is the key to the mystical experience, through which the individual gains information, knowledge, and direction from a source that lies higher than the objective self and objective consciousness can ever reach. The Inner Self is therefore the window through which mystical experience can shine and illuminate the objective mind, bringing to consciousness the awareness of areas of being, of the Absolute, of reality, that are not otherwise accessible to the objective consciousness.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It might be asked, “How is it possible to activate the functioning of the Inner Self? How can the human being reach into that area of the subconscious and thereby be able to have mystical experiences, or at least tap a source of information and knowledge that will be of value and that will have validity?” The answer to these questions lies in the ability of the individual to develop and utilize the process of intuition.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Man was created to use all his faculties, but so much of the time he has concentrated upon the objective faculties that the subjective ones are not noticed. There has been evidence that very young children frequently have a more intuitive ability than the average adult. Often when a child claims to have experienced something, it is downgraded by an adult. A father or mother may tell the child, “That is imagination. You are only making up a story. You did not actually experience what you told us.” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Such is the effect of modern education, not modern in the sense of today only, but in the sense that since man has turned toward dependence upon the material world and the objective mind, he has tended to belittle the intuitive urges that come to consciousness. The child, being unsophisticated, does not differentiate these impressions from those of objective perception. As we grow older, we lose the ability to draw upon our intuitive knowledge through the lack of use.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Attention should be given to re-evaluating the process of education and to training young children to use this innate ability with which every human being is endowed. The Inner Self serves as a medium for the voice of the divine in mankind. It is a spark from the everlasting flame that exists throughout the universe and derives directly from the Source of all things. It is from God. It is God. As we learn in analyzing the pantheistic concept of God, the whole universe is the body God, its expression in time and space. So is the Inner Self God, a miniature universe which exists within the individual. It is the sun of the human system, that which holds its various parts together, shedding its warmth and light throughout. It is consciousness in all its aspects and phases, and consciousness should be one. W hat we term the Absolute is represented in a segment as the Inner Self, operating in and limited by the matter of the body. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The Inner Self does not lie immediately behind the veil of the world of material phenomena but rather far, far beyond, in what we might call an ultra metaphysical region, where reason is transcended by wisdom and vision by intuition. The physical or material can be defined in terms of mind, but the mind and its Inner Self cannot be defined in terms of itself. To do that, a higher perception is needed, and a language whose vocabulary and grammar are beyond the reach of textbooks. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We need to be re-educated. We need to experience those procedures which will develop the ability to call upon intuitive knowledge and therefore utilize the Inner Self as we utilize our objective consciousness and our bodies. Such a process is a fundamental principle of the Rosicrucian philosophy. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
