<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-26</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-26" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 15 </p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-16" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor015"></a>MULTIPLE AND SECONDARY PERSONALITIES</p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph">A<span class="_idGenDropcap-1"> </span><span class="ALL-CAPS">few years </span>ago the public became acquainted with many new theories regarding the self, the ego, or the personality of human beings through the unique arguments introduced in public trials or in the newspaper discussions of the criminal acts of prominent persons. Such terms as <span class="Italic-Basic">dementia americana</span> and <span class="Italic-Basic">exaggerated ego</span> were the first to be made public and these were followed by a unique description of the “little man” who took possession of a sane and sensible person and caused him to commit murder. Later on more conservative psychologists or learned students of the human ego introduced the terms <span class="Italic-Basic">multiple personalities</span> and <span class="Italic-Basic">secondary personalities. </span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">All of these terms were used to imply that the average human being was a mixture of two or more personalities,one of which was the outer or general personality and the others deeply rooted in the inner self or inner consciousness. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The scientific experiments conducted by the eminent leaders of psychical research in England and America further developed the idea that whenever the outer or general personality of the average human being could be inhibited or made inactive, as in a trance or through deep concentration and relaxation, one or more of the <span class="Italic-Basic">secondary personalities</span> or inner selves would take possession of the body and supplant the outer personality. The expression of the belief on the part of recognized scientists opened wide the doors to the unscientific minds in the spiritualistic field and they immediately seized upon these beliefs and the scientific terminology, and we heard much for many years about the secondary personalities of so-called mediums. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Fortunately, the continued research of scientists brought to light certain facts regarding human personalities and especially regarding the so-called secondary personalities, and these facts gradually robbed the whole subject of its mystery and prevented any further development of the superstitious or spiritualistic beliefs regarding such personalities in connection with showy demonstrations in questionable seance rooms. The subject of secondary personalities has at last been taken out of the speculative, superstitious, and magical fields of demonstration, and put into the truly scientific field of psychical research. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Many of the most wonderful examples of automatic writing or automatic dictation are unquestionably beautiful examples of the existence and functioning of a secondary personality, and how a secondary personality may control the functioning of the mind and of the hand in writing or speaking. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In such circumstances the secondary personality assumes a name for itself, presumably the name which it once legitimately possessed, and expresses itself with all of the characteristics with which that personality was presumably once very familiar and well known. It is not unusual, therefore,to find this secondary personality very different in many important essentials from the present general outer personality. In some cases there is a difference in sex, a difference in nationality or tongue, and a considerable difference in education, tastes, abilities, and desires. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the case of those demonstrations where the secondary personality has been of value because of its unusual writings or dictations, it was found that the secondary personality had an education far superior to that of the outer personality. In some cases the secondary personality was learned in the arts and philosophy, possessed a high degree of literary and ethical culture, and expressed itself in beautiful thoughts truly worthy of publication. In some other cases,however, the secondary personality has been found to be illiterate and uncouth in its expressions and almost wholly the opposite of the outer personality. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The measure of genuineness of the secondary personality lies in its continued and consistent expression of a definite nature. With tests made over a long period of time it has been found that the writings of some of these secondary personalities are consistently of the same literary style, with no slips that reveal any forced or artificial tendency, and with an excellent recollection or memory of events and conditions, persons, and things associated with its life as an entity. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In other words, continued study of some of these secondary personalities has conclusively shown that so far as distinctiveness of character, distinctiveness of education and worldly experiences are concerned, the secondary personality is like unto a separate entity having lived at some time,somewhere, separated from the present outer personality. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">To make this a little more understandable to those who have not been inclined to study the subject of secondary personalities we will use one illustration. For nearly fourteen years I was president of the New York Institute for Psychical Research. During that time the organization held monthly and semi-monthly meetings of a regular nature with many special sessions in between these, when unique investigations were necessary. I think that in those fourteen years our members investigated over one hundred cases of-so-called secondary personalities or cases of automatic writing, automatic dictation, or automatic expression through the ouija board. Many of these cases were not worthy of more than one evening of test, for there was either evidence of willful deception on the part of the outer personality or such a blending of the outer and the secondary personality that the two could not be separated in the writings and dictations. On the other hand, there were many genuine and intensely interesting cases which we watched for many years. I will take one of these as an illustration. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Mrs. J. B. was the wife of a prominent attorney in New York City. She had received an ordinary school education with one year at high school. She was of a fairly well-educated family of moderate circumstances and had received the usual instruction in the ordinary principles of ethics and culture. Her husband was a graduate of a university, but interested, however, in no other intellectual pursuit than his law studies. He prospered well during the first two years of his practice and then married, and during the two following years he accumulated sufficient funds to occupy a very fine home in New York and to provide his wife with many luxuries. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Mrs. J. B. was a very kind, loving, and sympathetic woman of about forty years of age, with a magnetic personality and a charming manner which made her an excellent hostess. During the course of their many social affairs at home it was discovered that Mrs. J. B. had developed a sympathetic attunement with her husband to such an extent that she was conscious of many of his strongest thoughts or emotions even when he was many miles absent from her. One incident of this will indicate what I mean. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">On one occasion when the members of the society were all assembled at this lady’s home, preparing for a test of her automatic writing, two of us suddenly and spontaneously thought of a test of her attunement with her husband. Mrs. J. B. at that moment was in the large reception room of her home with a group of the women members about her and was animatedly engaged in a discussion of frocks, and dresses, and other matters of this sort, while three or four of the men were with Mr. J. B. at the front door of his home under an awning, smoking and waiting for the meeting to be called to order. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Without any preparation or any long consideration of the test, my companion took a pin and suddenly jabbed it into the arm of Mr. J. B. as though by accident. Mr. J. B. jumped,and an expression of pain came into his face, but there was no outcry, for he was the type of man who would immediately control himself in any condition of pain or suffering of any kind. However, less than a fraction of a second after Mr. J. B. felt the pain there was a loud and uncanny outcry from Mrs. J. B. in the other part of the house, fully seventy-five feet distant from him and separated by several rooms filled with fifty or more persons talking and moving about. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The moment Mrs. J. B. cried out we rushed to her side, as did others, joining the group that was standing about her. She immediately said, “John has just had a pain in his arm, right here, and I felt it, and I want to see what happened to him” She indicated correctly where the pain was caused by the pin, and in joining him she stated that she felt the pain at the same time that he did. She said it was a common thing for her to feel any sharp pain which he felt. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It was not her attunement with Mr. J. B. that interested us, however, but her automatic writing. For hours she would sit at a table with pencil and sheets of paper before her and write thousands of words of philosophy, advice, comments,or incidents of the past, descriptions of persons and principles, etc, without hesitancy or without seeming to become tired. Before beginning her writing she would sit in a relaxed position with pencil in her hand resting on the sheets of paper and wait for some gradual change that came over her inwardly or outwardly, and when this change was completed the hand holding the pencil would suddenly begin to write extremely rapidly, and Mrs. J. B. would often close her eyes and keep them closed for a half-hour at a time while sheet after sheet of paper was filled more rapidly than the average human can write coherently and profoundly. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In answer to questions, which were always reluctantly answered, this personality that expressed itself in the automatic writing claimed to be the “inner” self of Mrs. J. B, and claimed that the personality of Mrs. J. B. with which we were familiar was only an infant personality that was trying to usurp the position of the <span class="Italic-Basic">real self</span> within. This “real self” gave us the name of<span class="Italic-Basic"> Clara W</span>. It refused, however, to tell where it had ever lived or when. Its writings, however, revealed much in this regard. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It showed very intimate acquaintance with many sections of the New England states and with towns and rivers in certain sections which were very old. It referred to buildings and especially to several churches which had existed in those towns a hundred years previous, but were now either in ruins or completely gone. It also referred to persons living in those cities who were no longer living. It was thoroughly familiar with music and the harmonics of music, although Mrs. J. B. herself could play no musical instrument and had never been known, even among most intimate friends, to have anything more than a casual interest in music. This secondary personality was also well read in certain lines of literature of a profoundly Puritanical nature and likewise familiar with the Bible, and with certain religious beliefs that clearly classified its religious denomination. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the philosophical writings the expressions were always Puritanical, somewhat narrow, but nevertheless kind and sympathetic. In all of the years that Mrs. J. B. wrote there was never an expression or even a word that was not absolutely consistent with all that had been written and expressed by this personality in previous writings, and even thought he same questions were asked many years apart, the answers were always the same as proved by comparison of the writings. Mrs. J. B. never had any copies of the writings to retain and, therefore, could not have prepared herself for the future questions. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This separate personality of hers was unquestionably a distinct entity at some previous time, and today it was an imprisoned secondary personality striving at times to regain its control of her physical body. I mentioned her close attunement with her husband only because it was this unusual fact that first made both the man and his wife realize that her mentality or spirituality was of a nature slightly different from the average human being, and it led them into investigating the laws and principles of human personality. Whether Mrs. J. B. had any other unusual psychic development or not I cannot say at this time, for our research work was limited to a study of her secondary personality. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Now, Mrs. J. B is no different from millions of other men and women. Back of this secondary personality in Mrs. J. B. was another personality, and back of that one still another, etc. Many tests conducted in Europe and America have revealed that the existence of three and four personalities of a distinct nature. These <span class="Italic-Basic">multiple personalities</span> are unquestionably the result of previous incarnations, as explained in previous chapters of this book. The interesting point, however, is that the study of secondary personalities has become quite systematized and has been reduced to a very definite field. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The investigators of secondary personalities are not interested in any doctrines or principles involving the reason for the existence of such personalities, or how or when they came into the human being. They are interested only in the present manifestation of such personalities. Such research and study has brought to light many interesting facts. Primarily, it has revealed that each one of us is at times influenced by the rising demands, desires, urges, or inclinations of a secondary personality that seems to be just across the border from our outer personality. In other words, so far as personalities are concerned, there seem to be two in each human body trying to have dominance over the objective faculties and functioning. When the secondary personality is inclined to differ in taste, desires, and ways of living with those of the present outer personality, there is sure to be some conflict, and this conflict will express itself in the form of contrary or strange complexities which beset the events of our lives. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Often the desire to travel or to visit certain foreign lands,or to indulge in certain habits or practices, or to taste of certain foods, is the result of an uprising unconsciousness of the submerged personality. A pious and good person maybe tempted to evil deeds in this way, and an evil person maybe tempted to good deeds through the inclinations or urges of a secondary personality. This secondary personality may also manifest itself in periods of dreams or meditation, when the outer self is partially dormant and relaxed. Certain diseased conditions or injuries may bring on prolonged periods of dormancy to the outer self and permit the secondary personality to take entire control of the mind and faculties of the body. In such cases the person would manifest different traits, habits, customs of living, and mannerisms of speech, and would seem to be an entirely different person. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There are only two possible explanations for the existence of secondary or multiple personalities. One is the belief that someone outside, or the personality of a person now living, or who has passed into the Beyond, has temporarily <span class="Italic-Basic">possessed</span> our bodies and submerged our outer personality and supplanted it with its own. In other words, being “possessed” is one explanation. Such an explanation, however, resorts to what may be called <span class="Italic-Basic">supernatural laws and principles,</span> or <span class="Italic-Basic">supernatural beliefs, </span>and it resembles too greatly the ancient superstitions and beliefs in the existence of <span class="Italic-Basic">evil entities </span>which can take possession of us and control us. The only other explanation for secondary or multiple personalities is that they are the <span class="Italic-Basic">remnants of our own previous existences on earth.</span> Such an explanation does not resort to supernatural principles or to any unique or irrational principle in life. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Of the two explanations you have your choice. If you discard the doctrine of reincarnation and refuse to believe that we have ever lived before on this earth plane, or ever had any other personality of our own than the one that is generally known as our present outer personality, then you must believe that the great mass of scientific evidence showing the existence of multiple personalities and the easy manifestation of a secondary personality is proof that the human consciousness can be possessed or submerged by another personality and enslaved by it for a short or long period. Certainly it is more difficult for the sane and rational mind to believe that God in creating us and in putting his own divine consciousness within us also permitted of our enslavement by other personalities, than it is to believe in the rational doctrines of reincarnation. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
