<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-13</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-13" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 7</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-8" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor007"></a>DOES PERSONALITY SURVIVE TRANSITION?</p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">I</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">n any analysis </span>of this question we are confronted by two distinct and opposed claims. One is a theological doctrine; the other is called a scientific conclusion. Both of them are accepted by a large number of persons on faith. Both of them are sustained by the same kind of evidence when presented by the average representative of the school supporting them.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">To proceed properly, let us place in a few words the two opposing claims in regard to man’s destiny:</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">1. The theory of theology that man possesses an immortal <span class="Italic-Basic">soul </span>or <span class="Italic-Basic">personality</span> which survives the death of his body.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">2. The theory of materialistic science that man’s <span class="Italic-Basic">individualism</span> or <span class="Italic-Basic">personality</span> begins at the birth of his body and ends with the death of his body.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Let us note that the words used in these two brief contentions are carefully chosen. In number two the word<span class="Italic-Basic"> soul </span>is not used. Materialism does not recognize the existence of a soul, but does admit the very positive existence of that “something” labeled<span class="Italic-Basic"> personality</span> or <span class="Italic-Basic">individuality</span>. The term <span class="Italic-Basic">materialistic science</span> is used to distinguish one form of “science” from the many. Likewise, in number one the words <span class="Italic-Basic">soul</span> and <span class="Italic-Basic">personality </span>are joined as synonymous only because theology <span class="Italic-Basic">assumes</span> such to be representative of a fact</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The question of man’s destiny, or the fate of his “personality” after the death of the body, is so old that its origin is lost in antiquity. The earliest records of man’s thinking indicate that the discussion was a common and familiar one with but three conclusions as possible answers. In fact, we find that the materialistic conclusion was held by the minority of ancient civilization as today; and the majority sincerely held to the other. In all ages this conclusion or doctrine was philosophical, and not purely theological, as man has tried to make it in recent centuries.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We should not be considered presumptuous when we compare these various conclusions and beliefs, if it is our desire to find which of them is most in harmony with justice and which does the least violence to our natural feelings.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The materialistic doctrine is born of and based upon the <span class="Italic-Basic">assumption</span> that man is born a helpless, ignorant infant as a product of an unknown principle called <span class="Italic-Basic">heredity</span>, operating through or with forces and impulses of which he knows nothing and cannot combat; that, therefore, he possesses as advantages and handicaps, certain abilities, tendencies, fortitudes, and weaknesses, for the possession of which <span class="Italic-Basic">he is in no way responsible</span>. Why he was born at all, why he is what he is, and to <span class="Italic-Basic">what </span>end, he does not know and cannot know.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">He tries to reconcile conditions, as he finds them, with the doctrine of materialistic heredity—regardless of the many manifest contradictions; for his doctrine says that the thief, the murderer, the fool, the liar, and the depraved have but inherited the endowment of their forebears; while the good, the noble, the rich, the happy, and the prosperous have unconsciously, mechanically, or <span class="Italic-Basic">simply</span>, received the blessings passed by preceding generations. Such a doctrine does not account for the birth of a thief or a murderer in a long line of honorable ancestors, nor the birth of a noble, fortunate one in a family tree “rotten to the roots”.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The believers of such a doctrine contend that they should not be condemned for their frailties, tendencies, or commissions. Even man-made laws excuse conditions thrust upon one by another without contributory responsibility or warrant, and even the most savage races would not tolerate— let alone create—a law which justified the punishment of one man for the sins—or commissions—of another.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Such beliefs as this preclude the possibility of a Divine Intelligence concerned in the birth and existence of man, individually and even collectively, and eliminate the existence of divine consciousness or soul in man of a nature distinct from the material essence of chemical life in his body.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Therefore, says material science, man is a chemical product—the result of mechanical or systematic laws which automatically carry on their processes of reproduction without conscious intelligence. Man is just born as he is, what he is, struggles to modify the blind, indifferent laws of nature, and eventually succumbs to the inevitable breaking down processes of the material elements—and dies. That is the end of man—again, individually and collectively.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A doctrine of <span class="Italic-Basic">fatalism</span> is the religious creed of the materialistic believers. That we are born men—a certain type of chemical product—instead of monkeys, rats, or cattle, is due to chance. Our place in the animal kingdom is due to lottery. We have come from nowhere—by no real law that would prove itself by and through justice, mercy, forgiveness, consideration, or love—and pass on to nowhere again.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The good men and the just in the world are deserving of no more credit for their qualities than are the evil deserving of condemnation or punishment. Just as our tendencies, abilities, weaknesses, and prowesses are inherited without our sanction—or conscious warrant—so our experiences, fortunes, sorrows, joys, successes, and failures throughout life are acquired by us without deserving them and without moral or personal responsibility. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If we can cheat the system by beating the game of life in any move, if we can frustrate blind principles by our own developed sight, or build where tearing down seems imminent, we prove our individual strength and fitness to survive the decree of fate. The belief in eternal justice, law, order, goodness, and love is but a delusion. The law of right overpowering might, and character determining destiny is but a childish illusion—so declares the doctrine of materialism!</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The theological doctrine—like unto the materialistic one—includes an assumption, viz: that the soul or personality of each individual being is <span class="Italic-Basic">uniquely created</span> for each existence by God through immutable laws and principles known only to God. While this doctrine <span class="Italic-Basic">seems</span> to be a great and inspiring relief from the depressing viewpoint of the materialist—and for that reason has become the hope of many—it is found, upon analysis and experience, unsatisfying to progressive, thinking minds.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We discover, first, that although it transfers the authorship of our creation from blind, unconscious chemical action to God, man remains a creature made and born from the nowhere, and the credit or <span class="Italic-Basic">responsibility</span> for his existence rests with a personal maker and not with the process. Man is still a creature of circumstance and free from the responsibility of his creation, his existence, or his equipment, mentally, spiritually, or physically. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">By attributing to the personalized creative power—God— that which we could not attribute to the impersonal creative, chemical processes, we have our responsibility for our existence endowed with conscious understanding, omnipotent power, infinite wisdom, and universal purpose.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The very first of these endowments—conscious understanding—warrants our belief in universal law, order, system, and purpose. To create knowingly, to cause consciously and permit understandingly, God must have a purpose, a plan, a scheme of things. There can be no element of chance, no lottery, no accident. All must be by decree. Hence man is, again, and after all, a creature of fate—divine, spiritual, infinite though it may be.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Likewise, if man is the creature of such a Creator, he, the creature, must be in possession of some of the attributes of his Creator; he must have the wisdom, power, and understanding, to some degree, of the essence from which he emanated. He must inherit—through his ancestral heredity—that infinite equipment which theology calls <span class="Italic-Basic">soul</span> and which it intimates is synonymous with “personality”.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Theology proceeds a step further in its explanation of man’s inherited possessions and states dogmatically or logically—however you may view the point—that since the consciousness, wisdom, and power of God and man are of a universal and eternal nature, the soul of man is therefore eternal, <span class="Italic-Basic">immortal</span>.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">As we have said, the theological doctrine is different from the materialistic one in only a few elements. It still leaves man the creature of fate. It relieves him of all responsibility for his birth, his existence, his endowments, and his heritage. A theological problem is involved in such a doctrine and requires explanation; and theology meets the issue quite conveniently.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The creator of man, possessing understanding, omnipotent power, and infinite wisdom, working through a universal purpose, must willfully permit, at least, the sufferings, sins, and errors of his offspring. Hence, God must either be indifferent toward his creatures or positively approving of these things. And, since there is a universal purpose in God’s consciousness, he must approve of man’s sufferings as well as man’s joys.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">At once we find ourselves face to face with involved theological doctrines, creeds, and dogmas which include <span class="Italic-Basic">predestination</span> and revenge.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph"><span class="Italic-Basic">Predestination,</span> as set forth in the Westminster Confession of Faith, is the doctrine which reveals that: “By the decree of God, for the manifestation of His Glory, some men and angels are predestined into everlasting life and others foreordained to everlasting death . . . whereby He extendeth or withholdeth mercy, as He pleaseth, for the Glory of His Sovereign Power over His creatures”.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The principle of revenge or retribution is set forth in the Second Commandment (Exodus 20:5): “For I the Lord Thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; . . ”.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Practically all of the theological controversies of the past have arisen through attempts to reconcile the theological principle of <span class="Italic-Basic">fatalism</span> with <span class="Italic-Basic">infinite </span>or even <span class="Italic-Basic">mundane justice</span>. One of the results has been a tendency to shift the responsibility for the evil in men’s lives to a satanic character. Even this leaves open the contentions regarding predestination, free will, the original sin of Adam and the atonement for it.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">For, according to the theological principles quoted above, man is created arbitrarily and without his desire, and at the moment of creation is either <span class="Italic-Basic">blessed </span>or <span class="Italic-Basic">damned </span>eternally. Hence, man is either good or evil, fortunate or unfortunate, noble or depraved, from the first step in the process of his physical creation to the moment of his last breath, regardless of his individual desires, hopes, ambitions, struggles, or devoted prayers.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Such is theological fatalism! Does it offer any consolation when compared to the principle of material fatalism? Only our deeper and truly mystical conception of God’s real laws and purposes enables us to see behind these theological creeds and dogmas and find the truth.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Is it any wonder that progressive, searching, sincere men and women in all lands object to the narrowness of the theological creeds which permit such conclusions to be reached as we have in the foregoing paragraphs?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The principle of justice in all things—especially in the course of life—demands that man shall earn what he gets, deserve what he requires, and merit what he seeks; likewise, it assures man that he shall not get what he has not earned or deserved. The law of <span class="Italic-Basic">reaping what we sow</span> is not a theological, religious, or ethical decree, but a scientific, philosophical, and moral principle, the basis of justice.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The idea that man must suffer the sins of another, solely because the other was sinful through the fatalistic decree of his Maker at the time of his making, is certainly contrary to the principles of <span class="Italic-Basic">human justice</span>, let alone <span class="Italic-Basic">divine justice</span>. That one creature is good because the Maker planted good in him and another is bad because the Maker planted evil in him— forever and eternally, unalterably and irremediably—is most surely unfair to all mankind. But that the evil men should have their unearned or undeserved sins transmitted to their offspring “unto the third and fourth generation” is the utmost of <span class="Italic-Basic">injustice.</span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Thus the doctrine that all men are sinners and have the essential sin of Adam is a challenge to justice, mercy, love, and omnipotent fairness. Of course, if it is necessary to <span class="Italic-Basic">assume</span> that <span class="Italic-Basic">fatalistic man c</span>an sin against the omnipotent and infinite will or decree of his Maker, then the sin of Adam was strictly his own by permission or tolerance of God, and he alone could compensate for his sin. On the other hand, if mankind—forever and forever—sinned through Adam, then man alone should compensate through personal, individual suffering. Therefore, the doctrine of atonement, whereby man’s responsibility for his essential sin was shifted to another to be paid by crucifixion, is also opposed to justice.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Salvation through right living is impossible, according to these doctrines, for man cannot be saved through personal merit, since he has none—for all that is good in him, of him, and through him belongs to his Maker who decreed and foreordained it.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Man so loves<span class="Italic-Basic"> justice</span>, and has through the ages developed a so much better and more noble idea of justice—regardless of its seeming absence in the<span class="Italic-Basic"> theological scheme</span> of things— that he has refused to countenance, let alone support or encourage, the doctrines of either materialistic or theological fatalism. No successful scheme of conduct in life, either moral or ethical, least of all religious, can be built upon the theory that we are, from the primary phase of our creation, and for no merit or demerit of our own, either the favorites of God’s arbitrary blessings or the blind victims of his vengeance and wrath.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Therefore man seeks the truth—and his essential desire is to see justice done to the wisdom and power of God as well as to the interests of God’s creatures. This is what the true modernist seeks; it is what the mystic of all ages has demanded.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
