<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-10</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-10" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 5</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-6" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor005"></a>THE COSMIC CONCEPTION OF THE SOUL </p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">I</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">n the Occidental</span><span class="ALL-CAPS"> </span>or Western world there is a general or popular idea of the soul which pictures it as an invisible, intangible, spiritual substance of an immortal nature. This substance is believed to be the “breath of life,” or, in other words, an etheric vitality emanating from the Source of All Sources and carrying with it the creative power or energy of the Creator of all things that exist. In brief, it is believed to be a spiritual essence, the nature of which is to give animation and life to all conscious things.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This is all that can be definitely stated by the most orthodox and enthusiastic followers of the religions of the Western world. We may divide the principal religious denominations of the Western world into two broad classifications under the headings of Jewish and Christian. Therefore, let us pause just a moment to see what the leading authorities in those two fields of religious thought have to say regarding the soul. Turning first to the <span class="Italic-Basic">Jewish Encyclopedia</span>, we find that the nature of the soul, as taught in the Talmud, is that which was conceived by Philo, the philosopher. This conception— which is a human conception—is that the soul is dual in nature. One part is called the <span class="Italic-Basic">active soul, </span>which is the consciousness breathed by God into man, and the other part is the <span class="Italic-Basic">vital spirit </span>with which he inspired man. Here we have the foundation for a distinction between spirit and soul, as two parts of the same thing, and a reason for the confusion in regard to spirit and soul, which leads many modern religious writers and preachers to use the two terms synonymously as though they were identical. It is this confusion which is responsible for the spiritualistic movement and similar movements using the term <span class="Italic-Basic">spirit</span> for the term <span class="Italic-Basic">soul.</span> We note in the <span class="Italic-Basic">Jewish Encyclopedia</span> also that in some prayers the phrase is used, “May God give spirit and soul to the embryo” In other Jewish writings, quoted in the encyclopedia, it appears that the Jews believed that all souls are preexistent and that there are souls of different quality. The rabbis, according to the encyclopedia, do not agree in the belief of the preexistence of the soul. According to them “each and every soul which shall be from Adam until the end of the world, was formed during the six days of creation and was in Paradise”.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">For the Christian viewpoint, we may turn to the original Christian doctrines, as presented in the <span class="Italic-Basic">Catholic Encyclopedia</span>. Here, we read that the soul “may be defined as the ultimate, internal principle by which we think, feel, and will, and by which our bodies are animated” In this expression we find the Christian idea that in addition to the vitality which animates the physical body through the coming of the soul, there is a form of consciousness or mind that accompanies the soul and which enables this physical body to see, to think, and feel, and act with understanding.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Much more is said in both of these encyclopedias about the soul. Many peculiar ideas are expressed therein which will probably surprise and astonish the average devoted Jew and Christian. Further presentation and discussions of these unusual ideas regarding the soul will be referred to in other parts of this book in connection with the points raised by them. At the present moment we are concerned solely with the nature of the soul and not its origin or the means of its entrance into the body or its purpose after it has become incarnated.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We note, therefore, that the Jewish and Christian religions adopted the almost universal idea of all other religions claiming that the soul of man was not only a vitalizing essence of a divine nature but the <span class="Italic-Basic">seat</span> of consciousness or mind. We may safely say, therefore, that the universal human conception of the soul today is that it is the vitality and consciousness in man. This must be the view of every orthodox Christian and every orthodox Jew of the Western world, as well as the conviction of every orthodox person of the various religions throughout the Oriental world. With such a general foundation for an analysis of the soul and its nature, let us turn to the viewpoint as expressed by mystical revelation and see what is the cosmic conception of the soul.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">First, we discover that there is a very definite distinction between spirit and soul. Spirit is the animating vitality or energy that permeates all living matter in the universe. We must remind the reader right here that it is unnecessary to use the term <span class="Italic-Basic">living matter,</span> since all matter is <span class="Italic-Basic">living</span>. There is a difference between living matter and conscious matter. Rocks are living in the sense that there is a vitality, or force, or energy which infuses every crystal and every atom of their structure, and which holds the mass together in the proper atomic and molecular form to express the specific nature of matter. All matter is vibrant with this universal energy or essence which is universally called <span class="Italic-Basic">spirit</span>. It is in every cell of the elements composing the body of man, the body of every plant and vegetable, and of every material thing in definite expression in the universe. Spirit is, therefore, the universal essence that creates and maintains the expression of matter. Chemically speaking, or from the viewpoint of physics, we may say that the essence which composes the electron is the universal spirit. Therefore, we will put the subject of spirit aside for a moment and consider soul as something apart from spirit.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Our cosmic conception shows us that the soul of man and all conscious creatures is a form of divine consciousness, which has certain attributes or functions. It may, therefore, be called <span class="Italic-Basic">infinite mind</span>. This infinite mind has certain faculties which we may term <span class="Italic-Basic">seeing, feeling, hearing, smelling </span>and <span class="Italic-Basic">tasting. </span>These faculties are not separate and distinct functionings, as they are in the physical body, but a group or amalgamated faculty of apprehension and comprehension which in any one of its five forms of impression or receptivity is interpreted by us as that of seeing, feeling, tasting, hearing, or smelling. In other words, the mind of the soul is capable of receiving and comprehending knowledge through a faculty of perception, which is a combination of seeing, hearing, feeling, tasting, and smelling. The reception and interpretation of an impression by the soul is translated to our outer physical consciousness in the terms of the senses: seeing, feeling, hearing, tasting, or smelling. Judging the soul impressions, then, from our objective or physical form of consciousness, we would feel at times as though the soul had seen something, or heard something, or felt something, whereas, as a matter of fact, the soul impression was not through any limited channel of one means of consciousness.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The perception or reception of knowledge or impression by the soul through its one complex channel constitutes what modern mystics term the <span class="Italic-Basic">psychic sense</span>. When this sense receives an impression which is prophetic, it is called <span class="Italic-Basic">intuition</span>. By others the psychic sense is called the channel for inspiration. Many other terms are used to describe this perceptive and comprehending faculty of the soul, and among the Oriental religions and philosophies we find many strange words indicating the rather indefinite idea I have attempted to express in the foregoing sentences.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Thus, the soul has the attribute of comprehension, as a faculty of its consciousness. It has likewise the faculty of communicating, through a similar channel of psychic impressions, the thoughts within its consciousness. These thoughts impress themselves on the consciousness of the soul in other physical bodies by a simple process. The soul in man, being a part of the God consciousness or Oversoul of the universe, is never separated from the soul that is resident in every physical body, and a thought in the consciousness of the soul in one physical body can be immediately in contact with the consciousness in the soul of any other, or every other, physical body on the earth plane or in the spiritual realm.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Right here we have a cosmic truth which, if developed to its full explanation and understanding, would make plain the misconceptions of the modern spiritualistic doctrines. Nothing said in the foregoing paragraphs is consistent with nor in support of any of the claims made by the spiritualistic doctrines of the present day. In fact, an understanding of these cosmic truths will reveal the error of the present-day spiritualistic beliefs and practices, and will make plain why many comprehensible experiences and revelations have come spontaneously and unexpectedly through what has seemed to be an application of the spiritualistic principles.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This mind of the consciousness in the soul, being part of the Infinite Mind, is wise in all universal cosmic wisdom. This does not mean, however, that the essential wisdom of the soul, which it possessed before it ever became incarnated in a physical body, includes a knowledge of all of man’s artificially established and arbitrarily created beliefs and practices. It is often argued by the young student of mysticism and metaphysics that since the soul is infinite in its wisdom, there can be no reason for the statement that through its experiences here on earth it adds to its knowledge, and if it possesses all knowledge, it cannot possibly add to that wisdom.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Such students overlook the fact that the infinite mind of the soul previous to any incarnation on this earth plane would not be familiar with such mundane knowledge as the Sanskrit alphabet, the Morse code, the invented laws of man’s form of chemistry, the driving of an automobile, the best methods to use in buying and selling in the stock market, or the ethical codes and legal statutes arbitrarily established by man in various countries, communities, and localities. The universal wisdom possessed by the soul before incarnation and ever afterwards retained as its fundamental knowledge pertains strictly to cosmic laws and principles—divine decrees and rulings.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">When we stop to consider that the essential knowledge of one nation in one part of the world today is not the essential knowledge of another nation in another part of the world, or of the same nation in that part of the world centuries ago, we will realize that human knowledge, or earthly knowledge of human origin and application, is a transient, mortal something that changes rapidly and is not fixed for all times. The soul would not be aided in its earthly purposes during its incarnation in a body by being conscious of all the human knowledge accumulated by it through all ages.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The essential knowledge possessed by the infinite mind of the soul is that transcendental knowledge which man cannot obtain through any of the human channels or through any of the physical organs of perception and which he must, therefore, obtain through a spiritual means.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The coming of the soul into the body, therefore, is not for a single purpose, and we realize at once that we now have two good reasons for the incarnation of a spiritual soul in a human body. First, that for a reason which we will explain shortly, the soul is to have certain earthly experiences, and secondly, the human physical body is to have the advantage of spiritual knowledge and illumination in addition to its mundane knowledge.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The next point for our consideration is that after the soul is incarnated in the physical body and brings to the physical body the divine consciousness and wisdom, plus the transcendental faculty of perception and communication with the soul consciousness of the universe, we have a combination which in the human form expresses the closest approximation to the image of God.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Even a cursory examination of the principles of biology, anatomy, and pathology indicates to us that the physical body of man, independent of the soul and its consciousness, has a form of consciousness and intelligence of its own. The most minute biological cell under examination through the microscope reveals reactions to light, color, and heat, and other external conditions, which prove that it has a primitive form of consciousness of its own. This physical, mundane consciousness is limited and mortal. The smallest living organisms, such as the smallest ones living in water, are an aggregate of the primitive cells, and their bodies contain, therefore, the aggregate consciousness of the cells that compose the bodies. The physical consciousness in each living body on the face of the earth is no more than the aggregate consciousness of the cells composing the body.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Limiting our discussion to man’s physical body, we note from scientific experiments that the consciousness in the cells which compose the roots of our hair is a different consciousness from that which is in the cells composing the fingernails, the bones, the outer tissues, the muscles, the blood, or the other parts of our bodies. Each cell carries on its functioning and adjusts itself to its environment with similar cells and maintains its personality and integrity, its individuality, and its usefulness in accordance with the distinct consciousness within it. The cells which produce hair would not produce bone or tissue, or any other form of matter. No matter where they may congregate or with what other cells they may associate, they will strive against great odds and under very adverse conditions to maintain and perpetuate, establish and reproduce, their individual nature in accordance with their individual consciousness. There are forms of physical disorders in the human body where hair cells, teeth cells, bone cells, and others, accumulate in an unnatural position or relationship and continue to manifest their natures and reproduce that which they were intended to reproduce, despite the obstacle of wrong environment and abnormal situations.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The consciousness of the physical body is, therefore, an aggregation of the consciousness in every physical cell of the human body, and is likewise a combination of the different natures of consciousness of the many kinds of cells.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The mystic knows, therefore, that the difference between the most highly evolved ape and even the primitive man is not a question of soul evolution but a question of the difference between the natures of consciousness in the cells composing the physical body and the dwelling of a human soul in that body instead of the soul of an ape. In other words, the difference between the ape and the human is not only a difference of the soul in each of them but a difference also of the aggregate and combined consciousness of the cells which compose the physical bodies of each. An ape, therefore, could not evolve into a man by suddenly having a soul of man enter its physical body in place of the soul of an ape. A great change would have to be made in the physical consciousness of its body as well.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Nor could the ape become a man by any process of evolution whereby the physical consciousness in the cells of the body of the ape became like unto the consciousness in the physical body of man, unless at the same time a human soul entered the body of an ape. The idea of seeking, therefore, for a single missing link in the evolutionary stage of cell life composing the physical body of the ape is a foolish one. The greater missing link in such an imaginary chain would be the single link representing the stage of change from the soul of an ape to the soul of man. And no one can seriously consider making a search for such a link.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Man’s physical body, therefore, has a consciousness distinctly its own, limited and adjusted through attunement of its faculties to perceive and comprehend things of its own nature. The consciousness of physical man is keenly attuned to the consciousness of all physical nature. But it cannot be attuned to the consciousness of the Cosmic or Divine Mind, for this is of a transcendental nature and of a higher vibratory rate than the vibrations of the physical consciousness. All of the perceptive faculties of the physical body and all of its impressionistic channels are limited to the grossly mundane things of the physical world.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The eyes can only see to a limited extent and within a limited portion of the universal scale of vibrations. There are colors and tones too high and too low for the physical eyes to see. The physical ear cannot hear all of the sounds that exist in the universe, for its consciousness and its mechanical means of translation of impressions are limited to a certain low portion of the scale of vibrations. The same is true of tasting, smelling, and feeling. In other words, the human physical consciousness is a consciousness of itself and of its like throughout nature. It was created and placed in the cells of matter in order that matter might be conscious of itself in all physical forms; beyond that it has no consciousness and cannot perceive or comprehend.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Truly, man, in a physical sense, is a finite, mortal, limited creature, and without the breath of life, the soul, and the divine consciousness, is not “a living soul,” but a mere aggregation of earthly substances with their limited form of earthly consciousness.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A violet growing in the green fields is an entity with a personality and character easily distinguished. Its characteristics of form, color, odor, cycle of birth and rebirth, and other distinguishing features constitute its personality. Its personality is the result of all of the consciousness within its body. A rose is distinguishable from all other flowers by its character or its personality. These are a result of the consciousness within it. Burbank learned that by modifying the consciousness of a flower or a piece of fruit through the introduction of a few cells of different consciousness, the outer and inner character and personality of flowers and fruit might be changed. Primitive man learned long ago that he could graft the personality of one tree into another by grafting some part of the physical consciousness or cell life of one into the other.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Returning to man again as our principal study, we find that the character and personality of man are the result of the thought consciousness within his being. And just as the character or personality of a flower, a tree, or a piece of mineral, or a piece of fruit is not exclusively manifested by the outer shape or form of the thing, so man’s character and personality do not rest in the form of his body nor its size or weight, but in other subtle expressions of form, size, and color.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Realizing, then, that the consciousness within a man’s body, like unto the consciousness within all things, is responsible for the distinct character or personality of man, we need think only of one other important point in order to have a perfect picture of man as a marvelous creation. That point is this: The soul consciousness added to the physical consciousness in the body of man during incarnation here on earth gives man his character or personality. Differing from those things which have no soul or divine consciousness, man’s character or personality is not solely a result of the physical consciousness in his body, but the result of a blending or uniting, or cooperative action and reaction of the soul consciousness with, and upon, the physical consciousness. Thus, the dual consciousness of man constitutes his personality or character.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">One final point in connection with this cosmic conception of the soul. As the physical consciousness in man changes through its physical evolution tending toward perfection, the physical characteristics of man change. As the soul consciousness in man is given more and more opportunity to express itself and to guide or dominate the thinking and the acting of man, so his character and personality will change. In other words, as the soul consciousness and the physical consciousness in man change through experience, through greater opportunities to express, through more complete understanding and comprehension, through more perfect attunement with the higher principles of life, so the character and personality of man change and evolve.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We now find that we have three reasons for the incarnation of the soul in the body. First, that—for a reason which we will explain shortly—the soul is to have certain earthly experiences; and, second, the human physical body is to have the advantage of spiritual knowledge and illumination in addition to its mundane knowledge; and third, that the character and personality of man may be perfected.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
