<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-8</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-8" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 3</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-4" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor003"></a>THE ANCIENT BELIEFS </p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">T</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">he one incontestable</span><span class="ALL-CAPS"> </span>fact which is the foundation of our whole study of man’s existence is that man is here on earth and that his life consists of a series of experiences which at various periods bring joy and sorrow, happiness and sadness, contentment and unrest, love and hatred, peace and suffering.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The second important fact revealed through the experiences of life is that man’s nature is dual, or at least it is dual in manifestation. He is a physical, mortal body, with humanly conceived ideas and ideals, desires, ambitions, and conceptions. He is also an emotional or spiritual body having a subjective self or consciousness, which urges submission to its desires, inspirations, tendencies, and inclinations. Between these two sides of man’s nature there is a constant contest for supremacy and domination. Hence, man has come to think of himself as being more than a mere physical body like a mass of matter united by a chemical formula, and more than a mere mechanical contrivance like an automaton. He is likewise convinced by the sufferings and ordeals of the flesh that he is more than a purely spiritual being.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In attempting to find an answer to the question: “Why are we here?” man cannot subdue or cast out of his consciousness the idea that if he could determine <span class="Italic-Basic">what</span> he is, he would know <span class="Italic-Basic">why</span> he is. Therefore, along with man’s quest for knowledge concerning the purpose of his existence in an earthly life is the desire for knowledge concerning himself and his relation to the universe.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Theology has always attempted to explain what man is and why he was created. Science begins its explanation of man’s nature at a point where man is already a living, thinking entity. It does not deal with those phases of his creation that precede the chemical, the biological, or the mechanical constitution of his nature and being. This pre-entity period of man’s creation has been left to theology to explain. The theological answers have been varied and unique in accordance with the periods of time through which man has passed in the process of civilization, and in accordance with the light of knowledge possessed by the nations in all ages from antiquity to the present moment</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There is one point of agreement to be found, however, in all of the theological explanations offered in regard to the nature of man’s being. In all times and among all races, and in all degrees of cultural education, the inspired or logically evolved answer has been that man is a physical body with its accompanying physical consciousness, in which resides a soul, or a divine self, or a segment of some divine consciousness constituting an inner self. The duality of man’s existence is, therefore, a universally accepted idea. That idea is challenged by science since it cannot accept as a fact any premise or any principle beyond its ken. In all religions, however, the idea of an inner man or inner self is a fundamental which is stated as neither theory nor speculative conclusion.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If one denies the existence of an inner consciousness or soul as an entity distinct and apart from the physical body, then the whole subject of birth and rebirth reduces itself to a consideration of chemical action and reaction, and its purely physical principles. Such a belief would preclude any consideration of the subject of reincarnation just as it would preclude any consideration of the immortality of any part of man or the existence of any divine element in man. Therefore, since we are not dealing with the materialistic and non-divine idea of man’s being, we must set aside this phase of speculation and adopt the more universal idea that man is a physical body clothing a soul or form of spiritual consciousness. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Looking upon man, therefore, as a dual being, body and soul, we are forced to turn to theology and the religious doctrines of the past and present to find any illumination regarding the immaterial part of man. The scientist says that we may look to him for any and every explanation pertaining to the chemical, biological, pathological, and physiological nature of man’s existence. We must turn to ontology and theology for our knowledge regarding the spiritual part of man. Whether the present-day scientist is right in thus limiting his field of investigation, or is wrong in this regard, we may determine after we have studied the question in the future chapters of this book. We may say in passing, however, that it was not always so. Theology was not always a subject of study apart from the general philosophical sciences. Nor was there always a distinct study known as the <span class="Italic-Basic">sciences</span> as we have it today. Nor was there always a time when man, in his search for truth about himself, found two opposed schools dealing with distinct dual parts of his nature.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">However, the tendency in modern times has been to leave all questions pertaining to the spiritual or infinite consciousness of man to the schools of theology, and if we are to accept any of their explanations in regard to the nature of man and his relation to the universe, we must enter into a simple summary of them, for they are too diverse, contradictory, and inconsistent to serve any purpose through elaborate examination of their minute details.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In brief, we find theology in general throughout the ages admitting one fact or claiming one point with consistency. It is to the effect that the real part of man is the infinite, divine, or intangible consciousness and essence which constitutes the inner self. For this inner self many names have been invented and universally adopted at various times. The most general of these names is that of <span class="Italic-Basic">soul</span>, and we find it associated with another word, which means the<span class="Italic-Basic"> breath</span>; and for many ages the inner self of man was associated with the idea of breathing an invisible essence which constituted the spiritual nature of man. A second general principle most universally and consistently adopted was the idea that this soul of man is a distinct entity, or a spiritual something, that is immortal and at times separates from the physical body.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Thus we have two important points coming down to us from antiquity as fundamental principles involved in the explanation of man’s spiritual existence. These points we find beautifully incorporated in an attempt to explain the creation of man in the translated book of Genesis in the modern Christian Bible. Therein, we read that God made man out of the dust of the earth which represented the physical, chemical, mechanical, and material part of his being, and into this God breathed as a second part of man the breath, or essence, or consciousness, of life, and the physical body became a living, or animated, visible soul.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Two important secondary principles are intimated by this symbolical or allegorical process of man’s creation. First, that the physical body, made of the material elements of the earth, was completed and perfected as a purely material form before any consideration was given to the process of animating it with consciousness of life. Second, that with the physical body completed and yet lifeless, it was necessary for something more to be done to make it a living being, and that to do this there was added a second and a distinctly different and separate element called “the breath of life” After this entered the physical body, the physical part became insignificant, for man was then not merely an animated body, or a physical body that was filled with life, but a <span class="Italic-Basic">soul</span> that could live on earth and manifest itself and was, therefore,<span class="Italic-Basic"> a living soul.</span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">When the original version of this passage in the Bible is read and analyzed in its original tongue, one is more deeply impressed with the significance of the second point. We are impressed with the fact that the physical body did not take on life but that the invisible, infinite <span class="Italic-Basic">soul</span> took on a physical form by the uniting of the breath with the body. Even the ancients were impressed with this significance, and in their philosophies, which gradually evolved into theological principles, we are constantly reminded of the fact that man is essentially a <span class="Italic-Basic">soul</span> clothed with a body, and not a body animated with a soul.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A further survey of the theological and philosophical explanations of the past and the present reveals some other points consistently adhered to in the explanations, though often modified in accordance with sectarian creeds. These are to the effect that the breath of life, or <span class="Italic-Basic">soul</span> of man, was originally a part of the Creator, or God essence and consciousness. We are reminded in many ways and by many words that whereas the physical part of man is an accumulation of unorganized elements gathered together from the products of the earth, the soul of man is something that was drawn out of space and made into a form to be placed in man. We are reminded also that whereas the physical part of man was made out of nothing that had any form or nature of man in it, the soul of man already existed in the soul and consciousness of the Creator when he made the body of man.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We are reminded also by other points of the explanations that the soul in man existed from the beginning of all time and must continue to exist until the end of time, if there be such an end. In most of the philosophical explanations we are impressed with the belief that the soul’s immortality distinctly implied that since it was not mortal and could have no end, it never had any beginning, whereas man’s physical body had a distinct beginning when it was created out of the lesser and unorganized elements of the earth, and would have an ending when these mortal elements lost their organization and became disassociated.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Finally, our survey of the theological and philosophical explanations of the spiritual part of man reveals a universal belief in the principle that the soul or consciousness of man was always a part of the soul of the Creator, or God, and that it will live, or exist, or continue to function, as long as God or the Creator exists.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In these principles and ideas, therefore, we have a very definite picture of the nature of man’s being. We have man as a physical being represented by his physical body composed of the material elements of the earth. Within this physical body we have the spiritual body or soul. Man is therefore dual, body and soul. His body is mortal, being composed of mortal elements or of corruption, to use a theological term. Its mortality makes it corruptible. The spiritual part of man, or the soul essence, is a part of the God consciousness, and is infinite, divine, and immortal. It was originally, and is essentially in its nature, of the immortal and incorruptible. It resides in the body of man and, therefore, takes on a cloak of corruption, for the body of man cannot always continue, but must decay and corrupt.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The soul is therefore only temporarily resident within a physical body and cannot remain eternally in one body, since in that case the body would have to be immortal, as is the soul. Man is born with a new body recently composed of the chemical elements of the earth, and into this enters the pure and immortal soul that has always existed and will continue to exist for all eternity. The mortality and corruptibility of the body cannot affect the immortality and incorruptibility of the soul. Therefore, there must come a time when the physical body in its corruption becomes disorganized and can no longer contain the soul essence. A change takes place which is incorrectly called <span class="Italic-Basic">death</span>, but which is merely a transition. Body and soul are separated and the corruptible goes into corruption, and the immortal and incorruptible retains its infinite state.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Science has proved the correctness of the belief in the mortality and corruption of the physical body. The experiences of the flesh in our individual lives demonstrate that from hour to hour, and from day to day, we rebuild our physical bodies with the material elements of the earth in order to replace the corruptible and worn-out elements which previously composed it. Our other experiments have shown that the physical body can completely wear out and become so incapable of retaining life and vitality that the so-called breath of life, or soul consciousness, leaves it.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">By these experiences of science and our individual lives, we become convinced that it is a part of the economy of the Creator’s laws, and of the economy of life itself, for the soul to separate itself from the corrupting and corruptible physical body and leave the body to continue its transition into primary elements again, by which it returns to the dust of the earth, while the soul remains immortal.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If this broad and general explanation of the nature of man’s being is acceptable to you, my reader, then you are face to face with the next important question: “Why is the soul of God, or the Creator’s consciousness, placed temporarily in a <span class="Italic-Basic">physical</span> body, and what becomes of it after its release?” That double question has been the most insistent and most important query in the consciousness of man since the dawn of thinking and believing. It is to answer that question with more facts and less theory that this book was written and dedicated to thinking men and women.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
