<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-12</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-12" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 6</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-7" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor006"></a>THE PERSONALITY OF THE SOUL</p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">I</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">n the previous</span><span class="ALL-CAPS"> </span>chapter we learned that one of the purposes of the soul’s incarnation in the physical body is to assist in the building up of character and personality. This brings us to a consideration of what is character and what constitutes personality.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We have shown that all of the ancient and modern religions and philosophies conceded that the joining of the soul to the physical body results in “a living soul” on this earth. But we are not known as living souls but as certain characters and personalities, each distinctly different in many ways and classified only in certain broad generalities.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Our consideration, therefore, should be of what constitutes the personality of a living being. Character is generally considered as the ethical and moral principles which become the guide in life for each individual. Character, like individuality, is something that is not only constantly changing in many respects but is such a combination of elements of the physical self that it may be changed or modified at will. We mold our character, build our character, and establish our character by the things that we think, principles we hold fast to and adopt, and the acts we perform.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A banker as an individual is a banker only because that is his occupation or profession. The classification of a man as a banker refers more to his individuality and perhaps to his character than it does to his personality. The plumber likewise is classified as such because of his occupation or his trade. Some elements of character may enter into the determination of that classification, but his <span class="Italic-Basic">personality </span>may be absolutely unknown even to those who have employed him the most often as a plumber. An actor is classified as such because of his profession but not likely because of his <span class="Italic-Basic">character</span>. There may be traits or elements of nature in his character that would enable us to identify him as an actor or capable of playing the part of an actor, even though we know nothing of his <span class="Italic-Basic">real personality</span>. The artist may have nothing about him which would identify him as an artist, but there may be traits in his character which reveal the artistic tendencies and abilities which he possesses. He may be occupied in his art and he may not be. Nevertheless, he may be classified as an artist although we lack knowledge of his personality.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Individuality and character may be so instantly altered as to mislead us in our judgment. We may know a certain person as a banker through our daily business transactions. He may be employed in a bank where we have met him for many years and the mere mention of his name brings to our minds the immediate classification of “banker” In his outer habits, manner of dress, and manner of business conversation he may reveal himself as a character properly classified as a “banker” But we may accidentally meet him some evening in his home and find him playing a violin or a piano so proficiently that we instantly discover that in character he is also a musician. His individuality, as far as clothes and mannerisms are concerned, may continue to show us that he is essentially a banker by profession, but we notice that he can cast aside this individuality or character of the daytime and become the musician in the evening. Still, we may know nothing of his <span class="Italic-Basic">true personality</span>. We may meet him in the summertime in the grounds of his country home and find that he is also a very proficient and enthusiastic agriculturist. His long study of the subject of gardening, for instance, as a hobby may make him very expert in this classification and as we see him in his overalls with rake and hoe we see a different individual or character than the one of banker— and yet we may know nothing of <span class="Italic-Basic">his personality</span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The dignified businessman who has held a responsible position and earned the popular faith in him as an efficient business executive may be tempted to commit some crime and we may find him later on in a penitentiary serving some period of time. Having been found in his crime and discovered in his false characterization of an honest, worthy, sincere businessman, he has now thrown off his cloak and reveals his individuality and character on a level with the other prisoners around him; and we may be surprised through his language and actions to learn that the mannerisms of speech and habit which he exhibited for so many years in his business office were merely superficial qualities worn as a cloak. We may now classify him not as a businessman but as a criminal. Still, we may know nothing whatever about his <span class="Italic-Basic">real personality</span>.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I trust that I have enabled you to appreciate the difference between character and personality. Personality appears to be, therefore, that inner, private nature of our real selves which has little to do with all of our outer physical or mental characterizations. It is unquestionably true that the real personality of every individual will consciously and unconsciously affect the outer habits and mannerisms of the physical self. It is also true, however, that all of the outer characterizations do not constitute a perfect index to the real personality within.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The personality within us constitutes, in a mental phase, that which we actually believe, that which we actually know, and that which has become a positive conviction with us through our thinking and our experiences. In a spiritual sense the inner self is that which is closely associated with our deep emotions and with our silent, private, cosmic and spiritual experiences. In a moral sense our personality consists of those things which we have secretly and privately established as our immutable principles or code of life. In our actions our real personality influences us by the habits, customs, and mannerisms which we have adopted gradually and so profoundly that we are almost unaware of their existence and find it almost impossible to change them or modify them.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Briefly, we may say, therefore, that personality is the inner self, or the self that is being built up by the inner consciousness and the inner man. In contrast, character and individuality constitute the outer self, or that which is of the physical, mental consciousness.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A study of the human personality through psychology and psychiatry has revealed in the past several hundred years that it is gradually formed in each individual by external influences and internal influences. Some specialists in psychology call this inner personality the <span class="Italic-Basic">subliminal self</span> or the <span class="Italic-Basic">self-conscious self.</span> In a true classification, however, it should be called the<span class="Italic-Basic"> true personality. I</span>t is undoubtedly true that through heredity we inherit some elements of our personality, and it is unquestionably true that we also acquire most of the elements of our personality through internal and external influences.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">By internal influences I mean those urges, inspirations, ideas, and impulses that rise within our emotions as a result of spiritual or cosmic contact, or through the transmission of ideas and principles to the inner consciousness from the <span class="Italic-Basic">outer</span> consciousness. Certain courses of study, certain pictures, selections of music, and experiences in life will establish ideas, principles, and convictions in the outer consciousness which, because of their agreeableness to our understanding or to our other elements of personality, are adopted by the personality as further points of modifications. Experiences in life which teach invaluable lessons and bring to our outer consciousness a conviction of the truth of some great law or principle which we accept as being universal in nature and helpful in our progress through life, are adopted by the inner personality as rules and laws unto itself.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Sorrow, pain, and suffering, and the sympathetic understanding of the sorrow and sufferings of others will soften some of the harsh elements in our own outer nature and carry some points of characterization into the inner personality and there become fixed as additional elements of the inner self. Meditation, prayer, spiritual visions, and similar experiences of the inner self constantly add elements to the evolving personality. In this way the personality of the self within is being gradually developed toward a degree of perfection which it did not have when it entered the physical body</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Because of the very intimate nature of the lessons learned by this inner self, and because of the confidential principles and ideals held by this inner self, the real personality of an individual being is known only to those most intimately associated with him and discovered only through long, intimate contact.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It has been found also, through a long study of the personality of man, that the tendency of the inner self is to build up a personality progressively toward a higher degree of perfection rather than toward a lower one. Regardless of how the outer man may live, and even pervert the morals and ethical principles to a continuously lower standard—as with the habitual criminal who is brazen and bold to the utmost degree—the <span class="Italic-Basic">real personality within</span> is usually molding itself along lines that tend toward a higher standard and a greater degree of perfection.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It is a positive fact, revealed even by the action of confirmed criminals, that the higher ideals and more perfect standards of the inner self constantly challenge and question the actions of the outer self. Thus, most criminals sooner or later find themselves horribly annoyed and persecuted by a form of remorse actuated by what is sometimes called the <span class="Italic-Basic">conscience</span>, but which is really the voice of the inner self or personality challenging the conduct of the outer self. Psychology in recent years has found a way to reach and arouse from its temporary imprisonment the inner personality of many persons to such an extent that a correct picture of the real self is revealed and the better tendencies of this inner self are given an opportunity to control the outer being.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The reason for the general upward tendency of the development of the inner personality is due, first of all, to the fact that it is closely associated with the Divine Consciousness in man and with those channels, or means of securing knowledge, which constantly inform the self of what is right, what is just, and what is merciful. Secondly, the outer self of man may deceive others through temporary modifications or coloring of its true nature, but the inner self of man cannot be deceived by the outer self nor can the outer self be deceived by the inner self. And, therefore, man in his own private periods of meditation and thoughtfulness knows what is right and what is wrong and is not deceived by any fictitious claim on the part of the physical consciousness. Thus, man tends toward higher thinking and self-improvement inwardly through his own private understanding of the real facts of life, while outwardly he may not be conforming to the standards thus being established.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
