<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-22</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-22" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 12 </p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-13" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor012"></a>CHRISTIAN REFERENCES</p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">T</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">o those who </span>are devoted to the Christian religion and who judge any moral, ethical, or religious doctrine by its compatibility with the writings in the Holy Bible, I now direct my attention. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In fairness to the subject, I plead with these devout Christians to be tolerant and liberal in their attitude for the time being, and consider the following remarks with the same degree of fair and just interpretation as they expect of others when they argue their beliefs and their principles of faith. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">As stated in the previous chapter, there are many passages in the Christian Bible which directly and indirectly refer to reincarnation, and even Jesus the Christ referred to the doctrine of reincarnation in a manner which leaves no doubt as to his familiarity with the doctrine and his belief in it. The fact that the doctrine is not elaborated upon or explained in detail in the Bible is not a reason for concluding that it was not a popular doctrine or was one that was not acceptable to Jesus and his disciples. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The doctrine of reincarnation had no important place in the great message which Jesus brought to the world, and there was no more need for the presentation of the details of the doctrine in the writings of the apostles or the great prophets than there was for the presentation of the details of many other universally accepted scientific convictions and philosophical beliefs. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There is nothing in the doctrine of reincarnation that is not compatible with the doctrines expounded by Jesus, nor with the life he lived. I have shown in the previous chapters that the doctrines of reincarnation were universally known and accepted among the Jewish people and this fact was known also to Jesus. The belief in reincarnation, however, could not possibly prevent anyone from accepting the new messages expounded by Jesus, and there was no reason,therefore, for him to either criticize, modify, or comment upon the doctrine of reincarnation during his missionary work. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">What Jesus said of the soul of man and of its redemption and salvation in nowise conflicts with the fundamental principles and great truth of reincarnation. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The average Christian believes that <span class="Italic-Basic">somewhere</span> in the Bible, and <span class="Italic-Basic">somewhere</span> in the sayings attributed to Jesus by his disciples, there is some statement regarding the soul to the effect that at transition the soul of man separates itself from the physical body and rises to a spiritual kingdom and there dwells in unconscious bliss or peace awaiting the ultimate Judgment Day. These persons also believe that Jesus,or his disciples, definitely stated that the soul of man after transition remains eternally in a spiritual kingdom, and that the Judgment Day will come when all have passed through transition and all are ready to be judged at one time. If these statements of Jesus were actually expressed in the Bible,they would certainly appear to be incompatible with the doctrines of reincarnation. But the fact of the matter is that no such statements were made by Jesus. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The idea that the soul of man leaves the physical body at transition to live eternally in a spiritual kingdom, awaiting Judgment Day, is a doctrine that was <span class="Italic-Basic">added to the Christian faith long after the life of Jesus,</span> and is not based upon anything said by him. Truly, there is reference to <span class="Italic-Basic">judgment</span>, and to the dwelling of the soul in a spiritual kingdom, and of the ultimate and final weighing of our sins, but there is no statement to the effect that each individual may not have many incarnations before the time of the ultimate Judgment. The doctrine of reincarnation includes the coming of a final Judgment, and explains <span class="Italic-Basic">how </span>and<span class="Italic-Basic"> why</span> we are given opportunities to prepare for that Judgment: but there is no reason to be found in the original teachings of Jesus to warrant the belief that at transition each soul of each individual passes to a spiritual kingdom, or any kingdom, where it must reside until the end of time awaiting the ultimate Judgment Day. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If the Christian or the student of Christian theology can honestly and bravely eliminate from his consciousness and from his categorical beliefs the idea that the soul of man at transition enters into a place or condition where it is to remain unto the end of time, then there will be no difficulty in accepting the true doctrines of reincarnation. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It will be seen that I am making a distinction between the Christian doctrines as taught by Jesus and propounded by his disciples, and the Christian doctrines which were <span class="Italic-Basic">invented</span> or <span class="Italic-Basic">agreed upon </span>by church conclaves in <span class="Italic-Basic">later </span>centuries. I frankly admit that the present-day Christian doctrines as taught in the average Christian church do not permit of an acceptance of the doctrine of reincarnation. But these doctrines <span class="Italic-Basic">are not the original doctrines of Jesus the Christ</span>. I am not attempting to criticize the goodness, or soundness,of the doctrines thus invented or adopted, except to state that they have included certain beliefs that are now contrary to reincarnation; but they are also contrary to the other passages in the Bible, as I will show by quotations. In other words, it is possible for a person to be a devout Christian and a sincere follower of the Lord Jesus Christ as man’s savior, and as one of the Holy Trinity, and at the same time accept the doctrines of reincarnation. There are hundreds of prominent Christian clergymen and Christian advocates in America today who are firm believers in the doctrine of reincarnation and who do not find this ancient doctrine incompatible with anything taught by Jesus or anything demonstrated in his life. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">To start our Bible research and investigation, let us turn to the Old Testament for just one of the many passages which clearly indicates the popular belief in man’s continued rebirth. We will turn to the thirty-third chapter of the book of Job and proceed to read the last part of this chapter. Beginning at the twenty-seventh verse we find the belief of repentance and redemption expressed in clear language. We find the idea conveyed that if a sinful person confesses his sin at the time of transition or when he feels that his earthly life is about to end, he will save himself from future punishment and redeem his soul from the pit of darkness. In the twenty-eight verse we read that such a repentant sinner “will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall seethe light” In the next verse we find the principles of reincarnation or rebirth expressed in these words, “Lo, all these things worketh God oftentimes with man” In the thirtieth verse there is a further explanation of the twenty-ninth verse. It reads: “To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Taking these three verses together there is no possibility of mistranslation or misunderstanding. Bringing the soul back from the pit into the light of the living can only mean one thing. The use of the word <span class="Italic-Basic">pit</span> to mean the ancient burial places is a quite common expression in the Old Testament It is often used to refer to the underworld or to Hades. The use of the word to indicate a grave or the place of the dead is shown in Ezekiel 32:23 , Isaiah 38:18 , Isaiah 14:15 , and also in Job 33:18 we read of <span class="Italic-Basic">the pit</span> as associated with death. To be redeemed from <span class="Italic-Basic">the pit</span>, therefore, and brought back into the “light of the living,” and to have this thing occur “oftentimes with man” can only mean being reborn after death and <span class="Italic-Basic">given life again among the living. </span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The thoughts expressed in these verses are reflected in many verses throughout both Testaments, as, for example,in Revelation: Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in “ the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">When we start to analyze the New Testament we find that the same thoughts were held by the populace. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">That Jesus was thoroughly familiar with the doctrine of reincarnation and of the law of compensation is made manifest in many of his statements. I am not going to take the time to quote every one of the statements made by Jesus to his disciples which would indicate this, but I will take one that is typical. In the Gospel of St. John in the ninth chapter,from the second to fourth verses, we find a very interesting incident that deals exclusively with reincarnation and the Law of Karma. In this instance Jesus passed along the highway with his disciples and met a man who was blind and who was known to have been born blind. The disciples considered this an opportunity to learn more about the Law of Karma and the cause of human suffering, and so they called the attention of Jesus to the blind man and asked: </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">“Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered, “Neither hath this man sinned” nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">You will notice that the disciples distinctly stated that <span class="Italic-Basic">the man was born blind,</span> and, therefore, they were puzzled as to the cause of the blindness. If his blindness had come about later in life through accident, injury, disease, mistreatment of the eyes, or through any of the many causes of blindness,there would have been no problem about his case. Please note that the question of the disciples was whether the blind man himself had sinned or his parents. If the parents had sinned, disease or accident might have been responsible for the man being born blind, but in what manner could the man himself have sinned to have brought about blindness <span class="Italic-Basic">before birth</span>? Only by having sinned <span class="Italic-Basic">in a previous life</span>, and by bringing the blindness upon himself as a karmic condition. No other interpretation can be given to this question on the part of the disciples. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Please note, also, that the disciples asked this question without hesitation and without apparent timidity. The question is stated as though it were a common question and a most natural one, and the very nature of the question itself indicates that the disciples were thoroughly familiar with the laws of Karma and rebirth, and that they knew that Jesus was familiar with rebirth and Karma as universal laws. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Note also that the answer given by Jesus is not a rebuke to their question, and is not a criticism of the beliefs held by the disciples, nor does it ignore the thoughts in the minds of the disciples which prompted the question. Jesus accepted the implication in their question and answered that neither the man nor his parents had sinned, but that the condition had come upon the man in order that God might teach a lesson and manifest a principle. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Certainly this one incident should be sufficient to show that Jesus and his disciples were thoroughly familiar with the doctrines of reincarnation or rebirth and Karma, and there was nothing repugnant, repulsive, or incompatible with the teachings of Jesus in the doctrine of reincarnation or Karma;otherwise, Jesus immediately would have corrected his disciples for expressing ideas along such lines and would have rebuked them for such erroneous thoughts. Throughout the New Testament we find that Jesus never missed an opportunity to correct his disciples or rebuke any one of them when he wrongly expressed a universal law or expressed a false principle. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the third chapter of St. John, in the verses three to nine,we find another incident which clearly refers to the rebirth of the soul. Here Jesus is telling how important it is for a man to be born again in order that he may enter the Kingdom of God. Nothing is said as to how many times or how often a person must be reborn so as to purge the being of its sins and attain that purification which would admit one to the spiritual kingdom. But we find in the eighth verse of this chapter that the spirit, or soul, of man will come and go as the wind, and no one can tell how often or in what direction or in what manner it will come and go. This is an allegorical statement of the birth and rebirth of the soul, and the entire process of purification and redemption. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Another very pointed reference to reincarnation is found in the ninth chapter of St. Mark. Beginning at the eleventh verse we find Jesus again discussing, confidentially, the important doctrines of life with his disciples. The disciples were asking their usual questions and Jesus was answering in his typical manner. They asked him why the scribes were saying that Elias must first come. Jesus answered them and said that truly enough Elias would come first and restore all things but, he added, <span class="Italic-Basic">Elias indeed has come</span>. The question as to the coming of Elias referred to his rebirth and to his coming again. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the twelfth verse of the seventeenth chapter of St. Matthew the answer given by Jesus is amended slightly to include the fact that although Elias did come again as had been expected, the public knew him not and therefore disbelieved in him and mistreated him. In all of the references to Elias throughout the four gospels we find that the rebirth of Elias was expected. Nowhere did Jesus correct his disciples for expressing such an idea, but on the contrary, answered their questions and remarks with perfect compliance to the intimated principles of reincarnation. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We find this reference to the rebirth of Elias in one other very remarkable verification of the doctrine of reincarnation in the Holy Bible. I refer to that outstanding event recorded by Matthew, Mark, and Luke. Turning to the sixteenth chapter of Matthew we find that when the disciples were alone with Jesus again he wondered regarding the attitude of the public toward his life and his mission. He knew that they had expected the rebirth of Elias, and that every great avatar or son of God was considered a <span class="Italic-Basic">reborn son of divine appointment. </span>Therefore, he wondered which of the expected reborn holy men the populace thought he was. So,he turned to his disciples and said, Whom do men say that “ I, the Son of man, am? In other words, he said to them,” “Now that I am being discussed and talked about as the Messiah, who do they say that I am, since I am a son of man and am performing these so-called miracles and proclaiming these new teachings? In their conversations and in their private conferences, who do they say I really am?” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This question can refer to nothing else than the commonly discussed subject of rebirth and reincarnations. The public believed that he was a son of man, and that Joseph was his father or had accepted Jesus as his son, and there was no question in the minds of the populace as to who Jesus was <span class="Italic-Basic">in his physical form</span> or hereditary lineage. Furthermore, Jesus would not have been concerned with such matters, and would never have asked such an inane question as, “Whose son do the people think I am?” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Notice the answer as given in the fourteenth verse. The disciples replied and said, “Some say that thou art John the Baptist; some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets” Observe that the answers of these disciples referred to persons <span class="Italic-Basic">who had been anticipated by rebirth</span> and who were expected to be born again, and who were being looked for by the populace as <span class="Italic-Basic">reborn prophets</span> and leaders. Their whole reply is an expression of their belief in rebirth and a reflection of the common belief in reincarnation. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Jesus had an opportunity here to rebuke or correct his disciples for their expression of reincarnation principles, but he did not do so. He seemed to agree with their beliefs, as he did in every other instance where the principles of reincarnation were stated in his presence. His very answer to them is an acceptance of their statement and an acceptance of the principles implied. For he turned to his disciples and said, “But who say ye that I am? In other words, he said to” them that, after having been associated with him and learning his doctrines, and having been taught the secret of his mission and place in life, who did they understand that he was. It was here that Simon Peter made his famous reply and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God”</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Jesus accepted this statement and charged his disciples with keeping his divine identity a secret, and allowing the multitude to look upon him as any one of the former great characters as they pleased to do. The same incident is reported in practically the same words in the eighth chapter of the book of Mark and in the ninth chapter of the book of Luke. The fact that the incident is related in the same terminology with the same ideas by three of the gospel writers proves that it is not an incident of little importance, and that no “accidental wording” of the thoughts could be responsible for the principles implied. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">As a further illustration of the general popular belief in the rebirth of individuals, we find in the ninth chapter of Luke, beginning at the seventh verse, another interesting incident. In this story, Herod heard of the wonderful work being done by Jesus and he was perplexed, because it was commonly reported that this new great teacher was none other than <span class="Italic-Basic">John reborn</span>, while others claimed it was Elias, or one of the other prophets, come to life again on earth to live through another incarnation of activity. Surely, when the rulers of the country, and the public generally, hold such beliefs and they are discussed with Jesus and he does not correct them, but answers their questions with a sympathetic understanding of their beliefs in reincarnation, we cannot claim that these doctrines were unknown, <span class="Italic-Basic">or new</span>, in his time. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Taking the foregoing quotations as typical examples, we find that whereas nowhere in the statements of Jesus, as contained in the Bible, is there any remark on his part that is incompatible with the belief in the doctrine of reincarnation, or any statement that man is born but once, or that after transition he never returns to earth again; yet, on the other hand, many quotations show that Jesus and his disciples believed in the rebirth on earth. So we are forced to realize that those who object to the doctrine of reincarnation on the basis of its incompatibility with Christian beliefs are misled by the statements made by modern Christian leaders who cannot find authority for their statements in anything that Jesus said. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Returning to the one example of where the disciples asked Jesus, “Who sinned, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? we want to call attention to the fact that it was” thoroughly understood among the Jewish people that the sins committed in a previous incarnation would bring about some form of punishment in this life. Let me quote again a paragraph from the Jewish doctrine of the time: If a truly “pious person suffers it is only and solely because of sins committed in a previous incarnation—a form of purgatory for evil deeds in a former life” This passage is from the writings of the eminent Jewish rabbi whom I have already quoted in this book. It was this point that aroused the inquiry on the part of the disciples. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Certainly there is no reason for devout Christians to feel that the doctrines of reincarnation, as presented in this book,are inconsistent with the fundamental principles of true Christianity, nor contrary to anything that Jesus taught or his disciples believed. We find in the foregoing few quotations sufficient proof of the acceptance of the doctrine of reincarnation on the part of Jesus and his disciples. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If the later Christian churches, or the modern Christian religion, have modified the pristine teachings of Jesus, or introduced new doctrines that are contradictory to those held by Jesus, no true Christian should feel that he is bound to accept them simply because they have the approval of modern religious authorities. For that matter, many of the modern Christian lights and leaders of Christian thought have accepted the doctrines of reincarnation and have publicly stated that these doctrines are the only just and fair explanation of the universal laws of life. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The doctrines of reincarnation, as set forth in this book, do not do away with redemption, salvation, and the ultimate judgment of our sins, nor do they set aside any of the fundamental principles that Jesus taught or which constitute the foundation stones of the Christian religion. Devout Christians who are sincere and tolerant in their examination of the Christian principles and sincerely striving to understand their religion better, will find in these doctrines a valuable aid in understanding life. The bigoted and prejudiced will simply close their eyes to the statements in this chapter of my book, and will attempt to explain away the quotations I have given in the belief that they conceal other thoughts or other ideas which we do not understand. Therefore, I will make no further attempt to prove that the doctrines of reincarnation are compatible with the beliefs and teachings of Jesus. The wise and fair-minded persons will be quite satisfied; the others can never become convinced by any rational argument. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
