<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-27</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-27" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 16 </p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-17" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor016"></a>SOULS OF ANIMALS AND “THE UNBORN” </p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">T</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">he question often </span>arises as to whether animals lower in species than the human being have souls and what becomes of these souls after transition. Again this question occasionally implies that each animal has a distinct and separate soul which is in nowise connected with any other soul of the universe. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We cannot know of the so-called animal soul what we have been able to learn regarding the human soul for obvious reasons, but we do know that there is an Oversoul essence for all of the animal kingdom as there is for the human beings of the universe. This universal soul essence pervades the bodies of every living thing in the animal kingdom. Incidentally we may add that there is also a universal soul essence for every living thing in the vegetable and mineral kingdoms. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Unquestionably, the personality or character element of the animal soul passes through stages of evolution and development like that of the human. I mean by this that the soul character of a dog, for instance, will evolve and progress through various incarnations until it becomes a well-trained,well-educated, and highly intellectual character or personality. In other words, the soul personality of a fox terrier will reincarnate in the bodies of fox terriers from time to time and in this way evolve to a very intellectual character. The soul character of a fox terrier will continue to incarnate in the bodies of fox terriers until it has attained a certain degree of perfection and then will start a new cycle of incarnations in a larger or more highly developed animal body. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Judging the cycle from this point of view we would say that the soul personalities and characters of the animal kingdom pass through various incarnations in each species and then start a new cycle in the next higher or next progressive stage of animal development. A study of the intellect of animals on the part of specialists has revealed that there is a progressive stage of intellect in the animal kingdom. By some of these experts the horse is considered the most highly developed from an intellectual point of view; by others the dog is considered the most highly developed. The elephant also runs high in this line of progression. No attempt has ever been made to classify properly the various species of animals from such a point of view and the subject has not attracted the attention and serious study that it really warrants. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Theoretically it may be true that the animal soul begins its first cycle of earthly incarnations in the lowest or smallest or most inconsequential species. The size of the animal cannot be one of the factors in determining the intellectual progress; it is known, for instance, that among the insects the bee and ant show almost the same degree of evolved intelligence, although there is a great difference in the size of their bodies. There are many animals much smaller than the largest snakes which show an intelligence superior to the snakes, and an ability to outwit them in any contest of intellect. The rhinoceros with its huge body does not begin to have the intellect of many small animals. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Association with human beings is unquestionably one of the factors that enters into the progressive development of the character and personality of the soul of animals. Whether this special development of intellect on the part of such animals is due to special objective training which they have received at the hands of humans, or whether Nature has especially decreed that certain animals shall be more highly developed intellectually in order to serve man more efficiently, is a matter that remains to be determined through careful study. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">For instance, those who have been devoting their time to this study for some years have not yet reached a conclusion as to whether in India and other lands the association of the elephant with humans, who have trained him to do very efficient work and render unusual service, has resulted in the development of a high degree of intellect in the elephant or whether the cosmic conception of the soul personality in the elephant was originally decreed to be of a high stage in order that the elephant might serve man in many ways. The latter assumption seems to be the most universal opinion,and it will not minimize the effect that man’s training has had upon the elephant’s intelligence. It may truly be that the elephant was preordained to serve man as he does and is born with a high degree of intelligence in order to fulfill his special services and this higher intelligence has been added to and strengthened by training and association with human beings. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In regard to the structural anatomy and special physiological characteristics of certain animals, we know that they have been cosmically prepared and uniquely evolved to fill certain places in the scheme of things and to contend with certain conditions. The camel, for instance, is most uniquely qualified to contend with life upon desert land where water is scarce, and to battle against sandstorms and other conditions of life in the desert. Whether the animal has gradually evolved to such qualifications in a physiological sense or was originally created with them is outside of our present scope of study. Undoubtedly the continued struggle with certain conditions in desert life has tended to evolve in each successive generation of the camel a more efficiently equipped creature better prepared to meet such conditions. If this is true in the physiological sense it most certainly would be true in the intellectual, mental, or character sense. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The idea, however, that the soul personality of an animal,lower in development than that of the human being, can eventually evolve into a degree of perfection where it is prepared to enter the body of a human being as a sort of <span class="Italic-Basic">primitive human soul personality</span> is an idea that had its origin in ancient beliefs and is not supported by any actual facts found by those who have spent their lifetimes in investigating the subject. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It is probably true that the physical body of man in its anatomical and physiological sense has passed through many stages of <span class="Italic-Basic">material evolution</span>. There is no question about the fact that the earliest forms of primitive man were crude and far more homely and lacking in certain refinements than the human form of today. There is every possible evidence to prove that man’s physical form has grown in gradual stages from a more beast-like appearance to the present refined appearance. Despite the fact, however, that we can take the physical form of man and trace its development backwards to periods when the human arms were longer, or the feet larger, or the head and brain capacity less developed, with nostrils larger, the ears bigger, and the muscles stronger, there is no reason for the belief that we can ever continue this line of development backward to a point where the human form was no longer human, <span class="Italic-Basic">but entirely beastly</span>. In other words, the fact that man in his primitive form was more or less animal-like does not warrant the belief that there were stages of development before this in which man was either of the monkey, gorilla, or any other animal species. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Man as a <span class="Italic-Basic">distinct species</span> was created at the same time that all the other animal species were created. Regardless of the fact that in some period of man’s development his body was far more beastly than it is now, he was at that time so far superior to any other species of the animal kingdom that he was unquestionably the highest type of animal creation and had certain faculties and physiological attributes as well as soul character that made him the essential <span class="Italic-Basic">image of God</span>, and far above any other creature. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Man’s environment and his mode of living have had some effect upon the physiological changes that have taken place in his body, but his evolving mentality and soul character,from one incarnation to another, are responsible for the changes in his environment and for the improvements that he has made. The soul personality of man has ever struggled to reach greater heights of development and perfection, and has always held before it the ideal of cosmic attunement and eventual oneness with God. This in itself would lift man gradually into a better environment which he would create for himself, and while these improved environments have had their reaction upon his physical condition, it is a fact that man has made his environment rather than the environment has made man. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The wearing of shoes has had a considerable effect upon the formation of human feet and is bound to have a still greater effect in future centuries, for the physical body will gradually adjust itself to enforced physical conditions; but after all it is man who created the shoes and who is responsible, therefore, for the effect that shoes have had upon him. The same can be said of many other things in the life of man. The greatest effect upon man’s physical being, however, has been the result of the development of the intellect and of the soul personality within. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">What becomes of the soul character in the most highly developed animals is something that we cannot answer. Elimination of the belief that a highly developed animal soul personality can some day enter into the body of a savage man and begin its career as a human personality leaves us without any explanation or understanding of the future or ultimate purpose of the animal soul personality. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Sentiment, of course, has tended to make many believe that the soul of a pet animal, especially a highly intelligent dog which has manifested many traits of character in understanding human thought, may some day become the <span class="Italic-Basic">primitive soul essence</span> of a human being. It is not an unkind or irreverential idea but wholly one that is unsupported by any evidence. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Let us take, for instance, the highly intelligent dog which accompanied Commander Byrd on his expedition to the South Pole. This dog, which had always been the leader of the group of other dogs that led the first sleigh into all of the unknown regions of Byrd’s previous expeditions, revealed a high degree of intellect, human understanding, and intuition. When the dog became injured, and yet insisted upon facing the storms of the South Pole and appeared brokenhearted when he could not lead the expedition sleigh, it was found necessary to shoot him and bury his body in the ice of that barren part of the world in order that he would not starve or freeze to death, causing suffering which none of the men could bear to think about. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">What is to become of this highly evolved dog character and personality? The men who loved that dog would like to think or believe that some day it will be born again and reach a higher state of development. This is possible, but nothing can warrant our belief that the development of this soul character will take place in the body of a human being, of even a most primitive form of development. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Everything that we know of the human soul indicates that it is a part of the divine Oversoul of the universe, which is the consciousness and divine essence of God; and that this consciousness and creative essence was established in the universe by God, who resides in the image of his own likeness as a definite species of the animal kingdom called man. This divine Oversoul, which provides the human soul characters and personalities throughout the universe, must always exist intact, since God created mankind and has never added to or subtracted from it through any of the evolved processes that are taking place in the lower manifestations of nature. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The next interesting point in connection with the human soul is in regard to those soul characters or personalities which were destined to enter human bodies at birth, but were unable to do so because of an interference with the life of the body. The question is often asked as to what takes place when a human body is born lifeless or it fails to reach its full degree of embryonic development. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It must be noted that a human soul character, or personality, does not begin to function in a human body until the first breath of life is breathed into the nostrils. The soul that is to enter an unborn body is known to hover over the expectant mother and to envelop both the mother and unborn child for some time preceding birth; and unquestionably some of the soul essence permeates every part of the mother and unborn child; but there is no functioning of this soul in the body of the little child until the child begins to breathe and is a <span class="Italic-Basic">distinct entity</span> in a physiological and psychological sense. Throughout all of the mystical sacred writings of the past we find the thought that is expressed in the book of Genesis stated plainly and positively. The body of man is formed out of dust or elements of the earth, but does not become a living soul until the breath of life is breathed into its nostrils or taken into its body and it becomes living in consciousness and all of its functionings. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A soul, therefore, drawn from the Cosmic toward an unborn child envelops both the mother and body of the child awaiting birth. If the little body is born lifeless or fails to breathe, if it is prematurely born lifeless or is destroyed or injured in the early stages of its embryonic development,the soul fails to enter the body in a functional sense. As soon as the little body is separated from the mother and is no longer vitalized but wholly lifeless, the waiting soul personality with its vital essence returns to the Cosmic from whence it came and there is no incarnation or earthly existence in the little body. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">What effect this may have upon the soul character is not known and it is mere speculation to express even an opinion. If the little newborn body takes but a few breaths, or the organs are conscious of the bodily functions for a short time, even though that be but an hour or two, the soul has entered the little body and has started its earthly career. If transition follows thereafter, it is similar to the transition that occurs at any time during the earthly life of any individual. This is all that can be said on this subject with positive knowledge. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The belief that any destruction or injury to the embryonic body of the unborn child is an injury to the soul is merely a sentimental thought with a rightful reverential attitude of mind. Unquestionably the destruction of the human body or embryo in any stage of its existence from conception to maturity is a sin, since it is a sin against the process of nature and, therefore, a sin against the plans of God. But it is a mistaken idea to believe that any destruction or injury can have any effect upon the soul of the child, for even after its birth no accident or injury to the body of a human being can injure or harm the divine, immortal essence and consciousness of the soul. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
