<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-29</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-29" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 18 </p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-19" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor018"></a>THE FEAR OF DEATH </p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">P</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">erhaps one of </span>the most beautiful and satisfying results of understanding the doctrines of reincarnation is the complete removal from our consciousness of any fear of so-called death. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I have known in my lifetime very intimately and among my closest kin, those who have suffered intensely in the latter part of their lives through this unexpressed though potent fear of inevitable transition. Among these were several who were unquestionably sincere and devoted Christians, and who found their only happiness in the contemplation of transition through believing that living the Christian life would save them from the torments of hell. But they found no happiness or joy in the prospect of a long period of unconscious existence in an unknown ethereal realm awaiting an ultimate Judgment Day. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The average Christian believes that at the time of transition his soul enters unknown realms to pass through unknown experiences, and then dwells in oblivion for an eternal length of time awaiting a Judgment Day before the rewards of goodness or right living can be enjoyed. He shudders, however,at the thought of this eternal sleep and loss of consciousness. You may say what you please, and sing the songs of your church rejoicing in the fact that after you have been found good and worthy you will dwell in the Spirit of God;but the fact remains that in the privacy of your own thoughts you are like millions of others who do not find the prospect of any happiness or pleasure in waiting for some Judgment Day so far distant that a seemingly endless period of time must be spent in total unconsciousness and oblivion. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Two factors enter into the cause of the usual fear of transition, as found in the hearts and minds of the average persons of the Western world. The first is the belief that so-called death may come upon them suddenly and cut short their careers, ambitions, and desires for achievement, and deprive them of their success in life. The businessman who has just entered into the working out of his life’s ambitions,and is now venturing upon the realization of all of his hopes and plans, realizing that time is required to see the fulfillment of all that he has created, is always depressed and made unhappy by the thought of the grim figure of death stepping up to him and ending it all for all time. The young man or young woman just entering into the fullness of life and beginning to sense some happiness as a reward for all of the past waiting, hoping, praying, and suffering, fears death may come at any time and end it all. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Is there anything of a hopeful nature which these persons can find in a Western world orthodoxy? All that they can learn is that after the sudden closing of this life, they will be plunged into a place of purging for the cleansing of their sinful bodies and minds—or, if this does not happen, they will go into an eternal, unconscious sleep that is more dark and more void than anything known in this life, and they will remain in this state for an endless length of time, perhaps millions and billions of years, and then suddenly be brought before the Great Judge and either given eternal rewards or condemned to a place of punishment and purging. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Is there anything cheerful about this aspect, or this picture, of the future? Is there anything cheerful in the idea that at the end of this life, when transition comes, we are going to be held accountable for the sins we have inherited from Adam and Eve and our forebears, and for the sins that we have committed in ignorance and through lack of understanding, and that we shall suffer for these things without being given any opportunity to undo the wrongs, wipe away the sins, and live a life of goodness? </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If our transition means the end of all of our earthly existence and that what we are at the time of that transition constitutes the picture or the record by which we are to be eternally judged, then transition is the beginning of a period of suffering, sorrow, and regret. Our inner nature cries aloud at the injustice of this. Even man’s poorly invented and imperfectly conceived laws are more fair than this, for no man is held accountable for the sins of others, and his inability to know the laws and redeem himself is given consideration. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">An understanding of the doctrines of reincarnation changes the entire viewpoint of life. First of all, it enables us to realize that the greatest sins which we have inherited are those which we have committed ourselves and for which we alone are responsible. Furthermore, it enables us to understand that the sins which we commit here and now through ignorance or lack of understanding may be compensated for and the slate wiped clean and a new start given, whereby we may live a joyful life and try once more to make the goal with a clean record. It helps us to understand the purposes of life and to find the benefits that lie in all of our trials and tribulations. We can understand why there may be a profitable lesson in the suffering we bring upon ourselves, if we are to have another opportunity to live again and through conscious memory of the present mistakes avoid them in the future. We can look forward to the time of inevitable transition without fear and even with hope if we know that it is not the end of all of our experiences, but merely the stopping of one journey and the beginning of another. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Through an understanding of the doctrines of reincarnation we are prepared to go ahead and create and build and evolve our plans and start them into action, realizing that if whatever we are doing is the real mission of our life, we should put all of our effort into it and do it well without any fear that our mission may be cut short and our desires unfulfilled. If transition comes before we have completed the great work we have started here, we know that if it is truly our great mission in life, we will come back and take it up again and carry it on to a grand fulfillment. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The doctrines of reincarnation teach us that so-called death is not the beginning of self-annihilation, or of a long and endless sleep, or of an eternal period of oblivion, but merely a change of earthly consciousness which will in nowise affect the inner consciousness or the consciousness of self, and that instead of a long dark sleep we shall be alive and among the living in the cosmic realm improving ourselves consciously and preparing for a new opportunity, a new period, of earthly existence and effort. Such a knowledge of the true laws enables us to be prepared for the future regardless of transition, and it makes us realize that there is nothing in transition to be feared and nothing to be regretted if we live in accordance with the highest ideals of the Cosmic. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The doctrines of reincarnation assure us that if we follow the Great Master, living the true Christian spirit, or follow the highest teachings of our religion whatever it may be, we will earn certain rewards that will strengthen us and prepare us for another life in which we can earn additional rewards and reach a higher state of development. Through these continued existences on earth we can gradually attain that perfection and that degree of Christian spirit in our consciousness that will make us ready to stand before the Great Judge and receive the Highest Benediction. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The person who has accepted the doctrines of reincarnation knows truly that there is no death. He is not one who sings the songs and proclaims “there is no death ” and yet fears it in his heart, fighting against the decrees of nature when the time comes for the casting off of the old and worn-out body and the taking on of a new life. He is cheerful and happy in the knowledge that as he sows today, so shall he reap; that he will suffer for the evil he has done, but is given every opportunity to compensate and to redeem himself and live again in accordance with the highest ideals. Wherever we find one who understands these doctrines, there we will find one who is cheerful, happy, successful, godlike, kind,tolerant, and considerate. But more than anything else you will find that such a person has no fear of the future, nor fear of transition, and no dread of so-called death. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
