<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-15</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-15" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 8</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-9" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor008"></a>HEREDITY AND INHERITANCE</p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">T</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">he body of</span><span class="ALL-CAPS"> </span>a child is not <span class="Italic-Basic">created </span>but reorganized from preexisting elements. Every element entering into its physical make-up has always existed since “the beginning” and will always exist—even after the “death” of the body. Chemically these elements are either pure or impure, according to the nature of the environment in which they are assembled or the contamination by impure “seeds sown to be reaped”.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Heredity is the process of modifying the pure stream and straight line of ascent of the body’s physical evolution. It relates exclusively to the material elements of the body as transmitted or contributed by the preceding period of evolution, the preceding generation of existence.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A period of reincarnation for the<span class="Italic-Basic"> physical body</span> begins at the moment when preexisting elements are drawn together to re-form an organized body, and ends when the magnetic influence—life—ceases to hold the elements together; and these elements separate and return “unto the dust of the earth” again. From conception, or unification, unto “death” is one half the cycle of <span class="Italic-Basic">physical evolution</span> of each body. From dissolution or “death” unto unification again is the other half of the cycle.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The second half of the cycle is as essential to the process of evolution as the first half. Through dissolution or decomposition of the elements of the body they are freed from any abnormal or unnatural associations they may have been forced into by man’s willful violation of nature’s laws. Disease is the result of abnormal, subnormal, or inharmonious relation or association of elements in a part or parts of the body. Perfect health is pure harmonium of elemental relationship.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">“Death”—or dissolution—is nature’s economical method of ending the stress and struggle between the inharmonious elements for dominion and power, and the first step in the process of the return to a pure, normal, natural state and environment of each element. Thus, dissolution is the phase of physical evolution which is cleansing, purging, and rehabilitating.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">From the rehabilitation state each element is attracted again by the magnetic influence of reconstructing life, and finds its way to association, organization, and group manifestation.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the procedure from rehabilitated primary state to recomposition in a new group form, these elements may become contaminated, or have forced into their general assembly some disadvantageous or impure elements. In this manner the very first and later stages of physical evolution, <span class="Italic-Basic">prior to birth,</span> may prove to be qualifying stages of normalcy. This, and this alone, is <span class="Italic-Basic">heredity</span>—what the larger, parent body has sown. The offspring will harvest what its parent has planted. The lesser part experiences the effects of the acts of the larger part, while the larger bears the responsibility and must compensate. It is the law of justice in magnificent demonstration.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">When the soul enters the physical body it takes residence within a physical form prepared, in purity or contamination, to receive it. The physical form has no choice in the selection of the soul to be its companion through the forthcoming cycle of existence. The soul, on the other hand, has no free choice in the selection of the body in which it is to be imprisoned or glorified for another period of incarnation. Both are drawn together, attracted to each other, and united by the law of compensation—the law of justice.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The soul comes forth from its eternal abode with its consciousness and personality unimpaired by the changes in the mortal body from which it was freed at “death” or transition. It is not composed of dissimilar elements or temporary associates. It is one entity, uncomposed, uncreated, and undivided. It is the very antithesis of the physical body in every characteristic. Whatever may distinguish the physical body is a negative expression of the soul’s positive character.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The soul possesses, as a heritage from the Infinite Consciousness and Mind “in the beginning,” a <span class="Italic-Basic">mind and memory</span>, constituting a continuity of experience which is eternal. It is this consciousness of self, this <span class="Italic-Basic">mind and memory</span>, which we characterize as <span class="Italic-Basic">personality</span>, then, which grows and is molded into greater comprehension and power through the various cycles of evolution.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Into the physical body comes the soul with its personality, its perfect memory of all past experiences and its acquired penalties and rewards earned through the Law of Compensation. It is still free to choose, free to decide, free to submit or to rebuke the urges which comes from its memory of past experiences or the whisperings of the world without. But it has debits and credits to its record from the past and these it cannot avoid.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Whatever it may decide to do, it must contend with the Law of Compensation in attempting to carry out its decisions. The debt to be paid will be demanded by the Law of Karma at the moment which is most propitious. Ever and anon the silent adjuster of the law stands by and with the nod of his head permits the decision of man to come to an issue or to fail.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Karma is not revengeful. It would be self-annihilating if revenge or retribution were its motives. It can only be re-creative and constructive. The progressive evolution and advancement of the personality is its sole purpose. It demands not “an eye for and eye and a tooth for a tooth,” as does the law which man invented as his imitation of the Law of Compensation.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It demands only justice—justice to all, the sinner and the one sinned against, the benefactor and the one benefited. It has the power to carry out its principles. It leaves nothing to the judgment of man, for he had his choice and decided; it retains the sole responsibility for its operation, for man agreed to this when he decided. Its aim is guidance; its methods are instructive; its functions are redeeming. Such is the Law of Karma.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Karma selects for its <span class="Italic-Basic">propitious time</span> to exact compensation or bestow blessings that moment in the period of the soul’s residence within the physical body when the personality will profit most by the lesson to be learned, the experience to be realized, or the reward to be utilized to the betterment of all concerned.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It selects for its place of manifestation that localization of events which is most favorable for an impressive demonstration to all who may discern and profit thereby. It selects for its means of action or medium of performance those channels which will afford the utmost of efficiency and direction in compensative adjustment, with consideration for every living creature.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Since Karma seeks neither revenge nor retribution, but exacts only an adequate adjustment of conditions, a balancing of realization—that man may become more perfect in conduct—it may elect to suspend an objective compensation in favor of a subjective penitence.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If the personality of man is brought face to face with a situation in life which clearly reveals itself as a karmic debt to be canceled by a trying experience, it may find the experience modified, the test lightened, or the suffering eased, by <span class="Italic-Basic">acknowledging the justice of the debt</span>, and discovering the lesson contained therein. With appreciation for the knowledge, and with penitent heart for the error previously committed, the personality may find that the ends of justice and Karma have been satisfied. Thus the principles of salvation by grace, and redemption by atonement, have their real origin in the just working of a great law.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We discover in reincarnation and Karma the only rational and acceptable explanation and cause for the seeming injustice of the inequalities of life.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Some are born in wealth, some in abject poverty; some are born with every advantage for education and advancement, some with no opportunity at all. One is born handicapped, physically and mentally; another is born without flaw. In a given family of four children, one is strong and healthy of body but mentally defective; another is born sickly and with a weak body, but brilliant in mind; one is born with cruel, mean, sordid tendencies, bringing shame to all the others; and the fourth is serious and noble, with religious ideals.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Heredity alone cannot account for all the physical defects endowed at birth; it cannot always account for the physical differences in the various children in one family. Nor can materialistic or theological fatalism explain—with satisfaction and justice—the inequalities found in each race, each nation, or even each group of men.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The Law of Reincarnation alone makes understandable and acceptable the conditions and experiences of our lives.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph"><span class="Italic-Basic">I am tomorrow, or some future day, what I establish today. I am today what I established yesterday—or some previous day.</span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I may be as unmindful of things I do to establish my Karma as I am unmindful of many of the results of Karma. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I may be enjoying good health in this incarnation without appreciating the fact that I earned it, deserved it, or established it, by some acts or attitude of mine in the past. And I may show so little appreciation for this blessing of health, and so neglect its possession, that some day I shall suffer poor health—either in this incarnation or another.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I may possess those desirable endowments which others do not have, and simply take them for granted. I may elaborate upon the things I do not possess and consider my lot peculiar, accursed, and damned.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Each of us from our personal point of view is prone to measure the inequalities of life by the yardstick of his needs, and to overlook his blessings. If, however, we consider the good things we possess as natural birthrights, deserved or earned in some way, we should be consistent enough to look upon our afflictions as similarly deserved or earned. As soon as man looks upon his whole station in life as his birthright, rather than just the half that is acceptable, he will be ready to meet his Karma and work it out.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">How careful man is to guard his fortunes lest he lose them by some act that would justify the loss! How concerned he is that he may commit some act or fail to do something that will automatically, logically, and fairly turn the blessings of his life into other channels. Yet he fails to realize that the afflictions, adversities, weaknesses, and crosses in his life may be transformed, transmuted, and transcended in the same manner.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Thus we see that the inequalities in life are karmic and, in accordance with the Law of Karma, are adjustable. Thus man’s fate is <span class="Italic-Basic">ever in the molding</span>, and man alone bears the <span class="Italic-Basic">responsibility. </span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The full course of man’s life is <span class="Italic-Basic">not</span> one incarnation on earth in one physical body. To assume or believe it is, is to say that the elements of the physical body—matter—never cease to exist, never <span class="Italic-Basic">die</span>, or become annihilated, but man’s personality and soul come into existence, manifest for a time, and then cease to function.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We see, plainly, that the existence of matter is one continuous cycle of periodic re-formations, of expressions, never ceasing to manifest, retaining its essential nature always, but reborn in a new form in accordance with the immutable laws of the universe.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The <span class="Italic-Basic">personality</span> of man has its course of existence, eternal and continuous. Each personality came into existence “in the beginning of all creation,” and has always existed and will exist into eternity.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The course of such existence for each personality is marked by definite periods of rebirth in a physical body—a new medium of expression. We call each period of existence in the body an <span class="Italic-Basic">incarnation</span>, for the personality or soul is incarnated in the flesh. The successive incarnations are reincarnations or rebirths in physical bodies.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">From birth to birth, or rebirth to rebirth, is a <span class="Italic-Basic">period of evolution</span> for the soul or personality. This period may be divided into two phases: (a) the <span class="Italic-Basic">mundane phase</span>—from rebirth to transition; and (b) the <span class="Italic-Basic">cosmic phase</span>—from transition to rebirth. We may consider the entire line of the course of existence of the personality as eternally moving forward in undulating phases.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The very terminology used in this schematic illustration is suggestive of laws and principles. It is borrowed from the teachings of the Rosicrucians, the most highly evolved group of mystics living in all ages, whose knowledge of God’s laws and nature’s ways is most profound.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
