<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-5</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-5" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div id="_idContainer013" class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p id="_idParaDest-1" class="Chapter-Title-Split"><span class="ALL-CAPS"><a id="_idTextAnchor000"></a>Introduction</span></p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">T</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">he continued interest </span>in the Western world regarding the religions and religious wisdom and philosophies of other lands has led many thinking persons to give serious consideration to the very old and logical doctrine of reincarnation.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The demand for some understandable and rational explanation of the doctrine of reincarnation is responsible for the publication of this book. There are many small books or pamphlets in the libraries of the Western world today dealing with the subject of reincarnation, but in nearly every instance these books have been written and issued in conjunction with the outline of some ancient mystical religion. For this reason most of them are filled with strange philosophical terms or mystical principles which make the fundamentals of reincarnation difficult to understand and difficult to accept.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Perhaps this is why so many of those who are devout students of the modern Christian or the modern Jewish religions hesitate to accept any of the principles of reincarnation. I have yet to find an intelligent man or woman who, after hearing the true doctrines of reincarnation properly presented, refuses to admit that they are reasonable, logical, and acceptable.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">With this in mind, therefore, the chapters of this book were prepared at various times as inspiration moved me to write.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This much can be said in closing any argument regarding the truthfulness or soundness of the doctrine of reincarnation. We are here on this earth plane living a life of trials, experiences, lessons, and constructive instruction. Whether we accept the doctrine of reincarnation or not we will continue to live in accordance with some law, some principle, some scheme of things; and, when the end comes, this period of life on earth will be consummated and through transition we will learn of what there is in the future. What we may believe, or think, in regard to reincarnation will not change one principle of the doctrine nor affect the laws involved one iota. The great effect of such belief or disbelief, or the acceptance or non-acceptance of these doctrines, will be in our lives as we are living them <span class="Italic-Basic">here </span>and in our readiness and preparation to meet transition when we come face to face with it.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Knowing, therefore, that the acceptance of these doctrines will bring to the reader, as it has brought to millions of others, greater happiness in life through a greater understanding of the trials and problems involved, and an absolute fearlessness of so-called death, I close my manuscripts and pass them on to the mechanical masters who will prepare them for the public, and rest in the hope that thousands may find <span class="Italic-Basic">Light, Life,</span> and <span class="Italic-Basic">Love</span> through what I have written. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph ParaOverride-2">—H. Spencer Lewis</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph ParaOverride-3">The Temple of Alden, </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph ParaOverride-3">San Jose, California. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph ParaOverride-3">September 15, 1930</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
