<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-25</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-25" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 14 </p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-15" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor014"></a>BETWEEN INCARNATIONS </p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">T</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">wo questions arise</span><span class="ALL-CAPS"> </span>as to the activities of the soul during its period of temporary existence in the spiritual realm between rebirths. The first of these is, Why should the soul have a long or short existence in the spiritual world between incarnations? The second is, What is known of the soul’s activities in these periods between earthly incarnations? </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The first question is generally associated with the thought that if it is advisable for the soul of man to have a number of successive rebirths on earth in order to develop and perfect the ideal ego, why does not the soul pass from one body at transition immediately to another without more than a few minutes or few hours elapsing between the two great events? In other words, why should there be any delay at all in the soul’s passing from one body which it is vacating to the new body it is to occupy? </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Considering that throughout the world there are births occurring every minute of the day and night it would seem that no matter when transition occurred with anyone, the soul could escape from the old physical body it occupied and pass immediately into another body just being born. There are many thousands of persons, having only a slight acquaintance with the doctrines of reincarnation, who believe that this often occurs. There are those who believe that when a mother passes through transition at the time of childbirth her soul passes right into the newborn body, not only because the body was close at hand and ready to receive a soul, but because of the relationship that exists. There are a great many who also believe that when an elderly person passes away in any community, the soul of that person will immediately enter the body of any child being born in that community. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">These ideas are the result of a lack of knowledge of the principles involved, as outlined in the preceding chapter. Each personality or ego of the Oversoul has a definite cycle of rebirth with periods of spiritual existence between them. We have seen in the preceding chapter how the earthly incarnations of the soul, with its ego and personality, may vary in length from one hour to one hundred years or more, and how the periods between incarnations will vary in length;but only occasionally would there be a very brief or short period of existence in the spiritual realm between incarnations. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The purpose of these intervals between incarnations is to permit the ego to purify itself further and become illuminated by the Divine Mind and Cosmic Wisdom. It is like a period of rest and relaxation between hours of daily labor. It is refreshment for the soul and personality, and is strength to the spiritual powers of the divine faculties of the soul. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We may compare the intervals between incarnations to the hours of sleep that occur between the daytime periods of activity in our daily affairs. We may labor sixteen or eighteen hours of the day in waking consciousness and then spend from six to eight hours in sleep, wholly unconscious of our earthly objective affairs. These hours of sleep and rest afford an opportunity for the gathering of strength and recreation of the tired, worn-out, and exhausted faculties and functioning of the physical body. Sleep permits stronger exercise of the faculties and a more vitalized degree of power in the body and mind in the morning when the body awakens. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The same can be said regarding the intervals between incarnations. Immediately upon transition the soul and ego of the individual separate gradually from the body. This separation is not so sudden that the entire soul essence and ego are withdrawn from the body and rise <span class="Italic-Basic">instantly</span> to the spiritual or cosmic realm. The withdrawal of the soul essence and ego from the body requires from ten minutes to a half-hour and sometimes more time. This has been observed in thousands of cases where in homes, hospitals, and sanitariums, persons have been gathered about the bedside of a person passing through transition, or where very observant nurses or doctors have made the notations. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Generally, when there is a soft light in a room, or other vibratory or magnetic conditions which are favorable, the aura of the human body will be seen to extend itself gradually as transition begins, and this aura of a very faint color or combination of colors will gradually rise out of and above the body, until, in from five to twenty minutes, it is almost wholly out and above the body, and separated from it. But it does not continue to rise and does not leave the presence of the body for some little time. In some cases the aura has been observed to remain in the same room, hovering over the body or near it for many hours; and in cases where the light of the room and other conditions were favorable for observation, this aura has been seen to continue in the presence of the body for several days. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In many cases perfect observation of the aura near the body after transition has been interfered with by the sudden lighting of many lights and the presence of persons who had to perform their proper duties in caring for the body. In cases where there was no such interference for hours the observation of the aura has been perfect, and many interesting details have been noted. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In many ancient writings this phenomenon has been commented upon. In those cases where the aura or ego of the body was seen to linger and remain in the presence of the body for several days (or in the room where the transition had occurred) it was claimed that the soul or ego was “earthbound” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The belief is quite common in Oriental lands, among people who have observed and studied the action of the soul after transition, that the soul and ego remains after the separation from the body to perform certain definite things before rising above the earth plane to exist in the spiritual realm. Among the purposes thus referred to are the soothing and strengthening of the principal mourners or those who have been suddenly and seriously affected by the transition, the inspiring of certain actions or thoughts in the minds of intimate associates, and the entanglement of many mysteries that might be connected with the transition. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It has been claimed, for instance, that hundreds of carefully studied cases show that where transition has occurred suddenly without giving the individual an opportunity to look after a serious problem and properly to advise those who would be left in a quandary, the soul or ego has remained in the immediate environment of the relatives or companions of the deceased and aided them by inspiration or intuition to locate certain papers, hidden valuables, or other matters of extreme importance. It is also claimed by these authorities that the ego often remains in contact with the mourners to point out to them through intuition, or otherwise, the cause of transition when this has occurred through murder or accident involving a serious mystery. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In many other ways the ego can have a very soothing and comforting effect upon those who were closest to the deceased. It is this record of carefully observed facts regarding the ego’s contact with the earth plane after transition that gave rise to the superstitious belief in the existence of ghosts. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">When the uneducated and uniformed minds heard of the instances of egos remaining for a while to point out how a crime had been committed, or where an accident occurred, or where certain papers and documents were concealed, they believed that the ego was a highly luminous figure of the deceased’s body, and that it remained for an indefinite time in the environment of the transition and made itself visible to every person that came near the place where transition occurred. As I have said, this sort of belief was responsible for the development of the idea of ghosts which is so prevalent among the ignorant. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The truth of the matter is that only those whose psychic development or spiritual development has reached a high state can see the faint aura of the released soul and ego. Those who were closest to the deceased and who would be the most likely to receive any impressions from the ego very often do not see the lights of the aura, but feel the magnetic or vibratory radiations of the ego for many hours, or several days after transition, and they usually have a strong impression that the personality of the deceased is still in their midst trying to comfort and sympathize with them, and still lives. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The more sympathetic and complete the attunement that existed between the deceased and those who are left here on earth, the more perfect will be this impression of the ego’s presence after transition, and this impression is unmistakably definite in the minds of mothers when a son or daughter, of a loving and companionable nature, has passed through transition. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It has been claimed by some students of this phase of universal principles that a man or woman who was given in earthly life to an exaggerated faith in material things was sure to be “earthbound for some days or weeks after transition, and that the material things which enslaved him during his earthly life would continue to hold him to the earth plane for some little time. Thus they believed that a man who was a miser, or who gave his whole heart and mind to money or material wealth, or to some earthly thing which he made his God, would be bound and enslaved to this thing for many days or weeks after transition. In this wise came the expression that certain persons were doomed to be “earth-bound” </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Many fantastic stories have been written with this idea as the principal theme, and there are many astute and successful criminologists in various lands who claimed that their experience in solving murder mysteries and some other crimes has proved to them that a person who committed murder or some very serious crime against an innocent person is “earthbound” by this crime and for days and weeks after transition will linger in the vicinity of the crime in an attempt to aid in the solution of the mystery. These persons claim that the ego finds no peace, no happiness, and no opportunity to rise and free itself from the earth, until it does assist in solving the mystery of the crime it committed and in seeing that no innocent person suffers for the crime that it committed. These criminologists claim that by waiting patiently and observing the action of other persons and analyzing the impressions that come to the minds of those formerly closely associated with the deceased, many clues will be found that will aid in solving the mastery. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">This is a very wonderful field for exploration and study on the part of those who are interested in criminology, and in the possibilities of “earthbound” egos inspiring in the minds of others the correct solution of the crimes they have committed. Such a subject has no place in this work, even though many Rosicrucians in various lands have been delving deeply into this subject with eminent success. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Shortly after transition, however, the soul and ego are drawn upward into the spiritual or cosmic realm, and there remain until the time comes to descend again toward the earth plane to enter into a newborn body. As stated in the previous chapter, the personality or ego remains with the segment of the soul as a part of it, and the ego never loses its identity nor does the segment of the Oversoul associated with this ego ever lose its identity. Whether the ego is to remain in the spiritual realm for a week, a month, or many years depends upon various laws and principles with which we are not as familiar as we are with those laws and principles pertaining to the soul and ego’s existence on this earth plane. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">During its period of spiritual existence the soul with its ego and personality is in immediate contact with all of the minds and egos, not only in the spiritual realm, but throughout the universe. I have shown in the preceding chapter that at all times every soul expression and every ego in the universe, whether incarnated in a physical body or existing on the spiritual plane, is united and in continuous contact with all others because of the continuous contact of the Over-soul. This permits of the divine mind or psychic body of each ego communicating with every other psychic mind without difficulty. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The only manner in which the mind of the physical, outerself can know of such universal communications is by having the knowledge transferred from the inner self, or ego, to the outer self. In this very important point lies the one problem which makes universal communication seem either impossible or uncontrollable. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The untrained and the undeveloped experimenter in telepathy or in cosmic communications is apt to judge his ability to communicate with others by the degree of knowledge that is thus transferred from the inner self to the outer self. The outer self has no other way of knowing whether the inner self is ever in contact with other egos or not, except through the occasional transference of some impression from the inner self to the outer consciousness. If such transference or impressions is only occasional, or incomplete and indefinite, the outer self will misjudge the true functioning of the ego in this regard. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Experiments made by those who understand the laws and principles reveal that it is as easy for one ego to communicate with another as for one outer self to speak to another in a room. It has also been found that our inner selves are constantly receiving impressions from the Cosmic which have been released by other egos and that this sort of exchange of communication and impressions is more or less constant. Very often the transfer of these impressions is made from the ego to the outer self during dreams or visions, while the outer self is partially asleep or on the so-called <span class="Italic-Basic">borderline</span> of consciousness. At other times the transfer of impressions is made through the faculties of intuition, or a sort of urge within. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The important point to keep in mind is that we should not judge the degree or amount of contact communication thus being carried on by the degree or amount of knowledge which is transferred to the outer self; for only a small amount of such knowledge ever crosses the borderline and becomes known to the objective consciousness. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Of course, processes of development, concentration, meditation, and experiments will enable a man or woman to utilize the faculties that have been given him to bring about such transference of thought from the inner self to the outer self at will. This is one of the phases of mystical development known to the Orientals and to the members of the Rosicrucian brotherhood and similar bodies of mystics and meta-physicians throughout the world. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">When the soul and ego are freed from the physical body, however, and return to the cosmic realm, the personality with its mind and memory remains as part of the soul; and direct communication with other egos, both on the cosmic plane and the earth plane is maintained with the same degree of accuracy and intimacy as before transition. This is true to such an extent that persons living on the earth plane and who are mystically developed, or who know the process of attuning the outer and inner selves for the purpose of transferring impressions, very often receive knowledge or impulses of thought which are difficult to classify, inasmuch as it is often impossible to tell whether the inner self has received these impressions or impulses from the ego of a person living on earth or an ego that is in the spiritual realm awaiting reincarnation. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In other words, messages or impressions may come to our inner selves, or to our psychic minds and egos, not only from the persons living around us on this earth plane, but from egos that are now dwelling on the cosmic plane in the interval between incarnations. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Nothing said in the foregoing paragraphs should be taken as an implied verification of the claims of the modern spiritualistic movement which contends that the soul or “spirit” of those who have passed on <span class="Italic-Basic">returns to earth</span> and delivers messages to those who are still living here. Nothing in this chapter can be interpreted in that sense, for it is a fact that neither the soul nor the so-called spirit of a departed person <span class="Italic-Basic">returns to earth</span> except to reincarnate in a physical body and remain here for a certain period of time. You will understand, therefore, that I am intimating that there is a different process and method whereby the divine mind or ego within us can communicate with the egos of those who have passed on, without manifesting any of the conventions and claims of the spiritualistic movement. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">While these egos of departed personalities are existing on the cosmic plane they maintain the dominant nature of the last personality expressed on earth. I have shown in previous chapters that each personality is an aggregation of personalities, or, in other words, an accumulation of the essential elements of preceding personalities. And, after transition the ego of each individual maintains the same dominant personality that it had during its last incarnation in a physical body on earth. It is, however, always conscious of its preceding characterizations, although these are in the background, so to speak, and are like memories of our childhood. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Therefore, the man who was successively the farmer, the physician, the soldier, and then the banker, and who passed into the spiritual realm as a banker, would retain the dominant personality of a banker, while awaiting reincarnation,although he would be conscious of the fact that in the past he had also been farmer, physician, soldier, and perhaps many other characters in earthly lives. Even the name by which this personality was known in its last incarnation on earth is maintained as an identification symbol during the period of cosmic existence. It is not until the soul and ego enters into a new body for another incarnation on earth that the name of the last personality is laid aside and the dominant characteristics are placed in the background and new ones formed. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Thus we find in the spiritual realm millions of egos or personalities awaiting reincarnation. Some have been therefor many years; some for only a few days or a few hours. Some will reincarnate tomorrow or the next day or years from now, all according to the cycles of life as explained in the preceding chapter. Some of these egos in the Cosmic at the present time have the personalities of infants, for their transition occurred early after birth or in childhood; others are the egos of youths; and others of old age. But all are equal in soul essence, in divine power, and wisdom, although <span class="Italic-Basic">unequal</span> in world-experience and world-attainment. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It is in this cosmic realm that we find these egos dwelling in the <span class="Italic-Basic">Mansions of the Soul</span>. These mansions are mentioned in many places in the Bible, and from what we can understand through these references, and by the impressions transmitted to us by the egos dwelling there, it would appear that the egos of all human beings are privileged to dwell in twelve divisions of the cosmic realm like unto twelve chambers in a great temple, and that each ego awaiting reincarnation enjoys the privilege of dwelling in one of these twelve mansions until it is time for reincarnation. These twelve mansions are mentioned or described in the nineteenth chapter of the book of Matthew, in the twenty-seventh to thirtieth verses, as twelve thrones, and elsewhere in the Holy Bible and the sacred writings of many peoples, these mansions are given various names and allegorical representations. Even Jesus mentioned them by saying that in his Father’s house were many mansions, and he told his disciples that he was going to leave them to ascend to the heavenly realm to prepare a place for them. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In these <span class="Italic-Basic">Mansions of the Soul</span> the personalities dwell in preparation for reincarnation and receive knowledge and divine benedictions which purge them of their errors for which they have made repentance, and which they have freely confessed. This bathes them with new effulgence so that they are more evolved and more highly developed for their new mission in life. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The sins committed by these personalities in the previous life on earth, and which constitute their karmic debts, are known to them while in the spiritual realm and, while they are forgiven for these sins, and they are purged of the blot upon their characters, they realize that they must return to earth and make compensation for each sin and each error and that only in this wise can such sins and errors be adjusted. Therefore, while these egos or personalities dwell in these mansions and are prepared to live more noble lives in the future, they are also prepared to return to earth and workout their salvation by compensating for their sins and living a life of adjustment. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">During their regeneration in the <span class="Italic-Basic">Mansions of the Soul</span> these egos become keenly aware of their previous mistakes, and the repentance and regret in their hearts and their burning desires to undo the wrongs they have done and make compensation constitute the factors and conditions which men have been pleased to call <span class="Italic-Basic">hell </span>and <span class="Italic-Basic">purgatory. B</span>ut the real suffering which each individual must endure for the suffering he has caused or the evil he has committed<span class="Italic-Basic"> is not suffering on the part of the soul,</span> but a <span class="Italic-Basic">suffering of the flesh</span>, for it is the flesh that has committed the sin, and it is the flesh that must compensate through suffering. Therefore, the soul and ego must become incarnated again on earth in order to take on a body and be possessed of flesh which can suffer, and can compensate, and thereby make proper adjustment. The real <span class="Italic-Basic">hell</span> of the flesh is therefore <span class="Italic-Basic">on earth</span>, for the flesh cannot suffer <span class="Italic-Basic">after transition</span>, and in the spiritual world there is no flesh to suffer. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">These are the facts regarding the conditions and circumstances of the egos or personalities awaiting reincarnation as learned through cosmic contact, divine revelation, and the recollection of the ego’s memory. Again the student of sacred literature and the Holy Bible will find in these principles a further understanding of the allegorical statements made in such writings and explanation of many of the parables and stories told by Jesus Christ to his disciples. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
