<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-9</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-9" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 4</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-5" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor004"></a>THE QUEST</p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">I </span><span class="ALL-CAPS">have intimated </span>that one of the objections on the part of those who are fundamentalists of the modern type in their religious viewpoints is that the doctrine of rebirth seems to place the soul of man in the position of being a <span class="Italic-Basic">spiritual entity</span>, continuously bound to <span class="Italic-Basic">earthly</span> conditions. Such persons say that it is disturbing to the peace of their minds and their spirits to think of the soul as requiring earthly experiences, trials, and tribulations in order to evolve or perfect itself. They also argue that it should not be necessary for the soul to have earthly experience or to require any process or system of earthly development. Their contention is that the soul of man is a divine, infinite, spiritual something, having its origin in God and maintaining eternally its transcendental nature, and that it can be neither added to nor subtracted from, nor in any way made more divine than it is when it leaves God and enters the body of man. A final contention is that it is horrifying to think that the soul must have more than one contact with the quagmire of earthly contamination instead of returning to the eternal spiritual world and remaining there in its sublime spiritual state.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">All of these arguments are based upon certain assumptions which are faulty, or at least misunderstood. In the first place, attention is called to the fact that the soul of man <span class="Italic-Basic">is</span> here in a physical body and <span class="Italic-Basic">is</span> in contact with the earthly experiences, and this fact is neither an assumption nor a simple matter of doctrinal faith. All of our reasoning and arguing about the why and wherefore of the soul’s incarnation in a physical body here on this plane cannot alter the fact that <span class="Italic-Basic">it is here</span> and is passing through a process of experiences.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Granting that the soul in its spiritual essence is absolutely perfect and sublime and that no earthly experiences can improve this high degree of perfection, and granting that the soul has its origin in the consciousness of God but is nevertheless infused in a physical body to live for a time on this earth plane, we come face to face with the question as to why a soul in its perfection should require earthly experiences for even a day or an hour.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Orthodox theology of the Western world briefly and simply says that there is a divine reason and purpose for the soul’s contact with earthly conditions and its incarnation for a time in a physical body on this earth plane. That is really saying something that common sense would admit. It is not a theological conclusion but a rational conclusion. We cannot possibly conceive of there being no reason, no purpose, and no great end to be served by the incarnation of the soul in a physical body. To think of such an important element in the scheme of things as being purposeless would be to tear away the very foundation of our faith in the belief that the whole universe and everything in it exists and operates in accordance with law and reason, and that God has established nothing or instituted nothing that did not have some definite purpose or plan back of its motive and existence. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It is my purpose in this book to show that there is a good reason, a logical reason, and an acceptable reason for the soul’s incarnation in the physical body. This reason is not contrary to any of the sound, theological principles, and fortunately it is consistent with the understanding held by all of the religious movements of the world. By understanding these reasons and analyzing them, even casually, one is better prepared to understand the real purpose of our existence here on earth and to see why the true doctrines of reincarnation—freed from all of the unsound idiosyncrasies that personal opinion has attached to them—are plausible and acceptable to the thinking mind.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Starting then with the fact that the soul in its essence and vital nature is a spiritual substance originating in the consciousness of God and emanating from the spiritual realm, we proceed to study the attributes of this soul and learn what it really is, and why it may benefit by contact with earthly experiences.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Perhaps only in the Western world and among Western religions is the nature of the soul so little understood. The rapid advance and propagation of the claims of modern spiritualism represents a form of speculation possible only because of the lack of knowledge on the part of persons in the Western world regarding the soul, its nature, and its attributes. To the Orientals and to almost three fourths of the world’s religious population the many preposterous claims of spiritualism as a religion, a philosophy, or a popular belief originated in the Western world solely because of popular misconception regarding the soul. It was claimed recently by one eminent clergyman, who regretted the increasing interest in spiritualistic seances in America, that the World War [I] with the attendant loss of millions of lives was responsible for the great increase in numbers of persons who turned to spiritualism to find some consolation, and perhaps some illumination, in regard to the unknown or sudden passing of beloved ones. But in many foreign nations there was also a tremendous loss of life, and among these peoples there was not the frantic turning to spiritualism for understanding because most of these foreign persons were too well acquainted with certain fundamental facts which enabled them to understand what the Western minds had not yet learned.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Clergymen in the Western world are as responsible as any others for the progress of spiritualism, for if the churches of the Western world and the religions of the Occidental had not eliminated from their early doctrines and creeds the principles which revealed the true nature and attributes of the soul, there would not be the present-day misunderstanding and misconception in this regard, and the many mystical movements now found in America and England would have no actual necessity as a foundation for their existence.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In most of Europe, and in all of America, the great fundamental truths of man’s spiritual nature and existence have been modified or entirely eliminated from modern creeds and dogmas. If these were understood as well today as they were in the days when Jesus the Christ talked to his disciples and with the multitudes, and when the foundation for the Christian church was laid, there would be no need for any such book as the present one or the hundreds of others which have been published within the last ten years casting new light on the teachings of Jesus, and the pristine principles of Christianity.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
