<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Mansions-of-the-Soul-6</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Mansions-of-the-Soul-6" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter 1</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-2" class="Chapter-Title"><a id="_idTextAnchor001"></a>“I GO TO PREPARE A PLACE FOR YOU”</p>
			<p class="First-Paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">T</span><span class="ALL-CAPS">he stone was </span>struck and there issued a spark! Again the striking of the stone, and another spark! And a third time! Now a little flame grew in the dry grass and feathers; and the flame gave forth light and burned the little twigs, producing a fire. The fire was kindled and nourished until it enlarged its size and intensity. Burning on flat stones and crudely protected by others, there was soon a small furnace of heat and light which radiated its vibrations into the gloom of the small wood-and-mud cabin.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Rejoicing in this new and marvelous addition to their roughly constructed home, primitive man and primitive woman, for the first time, seated themselves on the bark covered floor and gazed into the dimly lighted recesses of the enclosure which now became an enjoyable place at night.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Not long ago, this man and woman had ventured from the protected place in the branches of a tree, where they had lived in safety, to construct and occupy the dream place of their evolving minds. Contemplating the possibility of a larger environment than the tree afforded for safe relaxation and protection from animals of prey, they had built the first home, the first cottage, the first castle man ever knew.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">With the setting of the sun each day came darkness and the coldness of the night. The long hours of silence, accompanied by the inability to see or to employ the time, added to the despondency and discouragement of the monotonous life from sunset to sunrise. True, the more perfect enclosure and protection from winds and storms made this crude home so superior to the dwelling place in the trees that a sense of kingship and mastership over the elements and the creatures of the earth brought many new inspirations to the minds and hearts of these beings, who were looked upon as more fortunate and blessed than their companions.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The night had afforded but one pleasure, one rich reward, for the labors of the day; this was to sleep and dream. But, the idleness of the early evening hours, when the mind was keenly active and speculation unlimited, became the dread of each day. Surely life held something better than this, even though the light of the sun and the shadows of the night painted no picture of an answer to the mystery.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Then came the discovery of the spark, the light, the flame, the fire, the heat! In an instant, the life of primitive man and woman was changed. The darkness of the night could be dispelled, the coldness of the evening air and morning breeze could be modified, metals could be reduced to malleable forms, and food could be prepared more tastefully than in the past.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The greatest change of all, however, was that which came with the coming of <span class="Italic-Basic">light.</span> Light at night. Light in the darkest hours and in the darkest home. Light and warmth at the fireside. A hearth place of comfort. A place where the long and silent hours of the night might be profitably spent. Pleasure, comfort, discourse, learning!</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The coming of the night was anticipated with joy throughout the day. When the setting sun brought an end to the hunt and to the work of the fields, and when the tired body could no longer carry on, there were still the hours of the evening to refresh man and afford him the luxurious pleasure of warmth while he rested in enjoyable companionship before the fire.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Sitting in the glowing lights of the blessed fire, the mind was tricked into concentration upon the fantastic forms and weird action of the flames. The marvels of nature’s powers and possibilities intrigued the imagination and tempted the speculative faculties of primitive man’s receptive consciousness. Here, meditation was the school, and the mysteries of life the teacher who questioned and drew forth the answer from the inspired impressions of each mind.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">To this fiery shrine came others with their questions, their dreams, their problems, and their desire for light <span class="Italic-Basic">and more light</span>. The fireplace became the center of the temple of mystery, and the hearthstone became the altar of the worship of primitive man, when his thoughts were turned toward nature and its marvels.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It was here that men first directed their thoughts toward the possibility of an omnipotent power which ruled the forces of the universe and created the bounties of life; it was here that primitive men first lifted their thoughts beyond themselves to that which must be greater than the greatest among them. It was here that men first sought the castles of the soul, more grand than the castles of the body or the castles they built with mud and wood.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Heathens they were called, because they worshiped at the hearthstone. Castles they sought, for in castles there were protection, warmth, comfort, and the time to think and dream. Mansions of the souls they looked for and found at last in the uplift of their thoughts and the uniting of their minds in one perfect conception of a heavenly realm.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Still, there was always the quest for knowledge and the desire for answers to problems unsolved. “Why are we here? who are we? whence came we? and whither do we go?” There were the questions that were asked at the first hearthstone, and are asked today at every hearthstone, with the same sincerity and an increasing desire for explicit and understandable explanations.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Have we, as individuals, a definite mission in life? Is each human being an entity, an individuality, known to and considered by the Infinite Intelligence as an important element in the universal scheme of things? Is the earth, after all, merely a stage, presenting a passing drama into which we have cast ourselves by our own voluntary preference? And when our parts are played, is our work on earth truly done?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The sacred scriptures of all religions speak of only one earth, one globe, one place in the whole of the universe where man was created and exists as an image of some Creator. Science, on the other hand, busily occupies itself on the borderline of discovery, anticipating that it may reveal to us at any moment the actual existence of other planets than this one, filled with human life or living creatures not unlike ourselves. The gospels of the ages and of all nations speak of great avatars and messengers of the Holy Messiah and the God of Gods, who have come to earth to save all living beings. Is there no redemption, no saving grace, for the beings on other planets, or have they no souls, no personalities that are divine and worthy of infinite consideration?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Is this personality of ours, this individuality which we strive to build up through idealism and the elimination of undesirable traits, merely a temporary or imaginary creation of our minds?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Down through the ages has come the cry for<span class="Italic-Basic"> light a</span>nd <span class="Italic-Basic">more light. </span>About us, everything is changing and nothing seems permanent and fixed. The mountains crumble away, the rivers dry up and cease to flow, islands sink, and new seas are formed. The great oaks, in all their majesty, must succumb to transition, to change, or death. Man goes on his way and crosses the borderline into the unknown and seems to end his existence in the twinkling of an eye. Is there any part of man, therefore, or any part of nature, that is immortal, unchanging, permanent, and continuous?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Is there a survival beyond man’s mere memory of the personalities that now exist in human form? Will the death of the body or the change of its form release an intangible and invisible something that will rise to greater heights than the monuments to remembered characters, or surmount the limitations of time and space, and thereby attain incorruptibility and immortality?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If the present physical body is a mansion of the soul and the Great Messenger of God went forward to prepare other places of this soul, are there other mansions then to be attained, and how?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It has been the hope of the world—and the inspiring power that has enabled man to carry on in the face of mighty obstacles—that some day he would be freed of the mortal cloak that enslaves him on this earth and he would rise to a life of eternal bliss and goodness. If the religions that have inspired man are true, and the culminating joy of his life is to be found only in the spiritual existence of his soul in a realm beyond the earth, why have the souls of millions been imprisoned here to suffer and to know torment, sorrow, strife, and conflict? What end is served, what mission fulfilled, by the incarnation of the soul here? If, out of the sublime, spiritual consciousness of a blissful kingdom comes each soul, and to this same high state must it return to enjoy its divine heritage, why is it sent forth from such a transcendental place to dwell in association with corruption, sin, evil, and dross?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">These are the questions which millions are asking today and which must be answered more completely, more satisfyingly, and more constructively than they have been answered in the past. Directing our attention to the worship of God, and inspiring us with the belief that this God is loving, merciful, tender, and just, will not answer these questions but will merely add to the mystery of our existence. Granted that an omnipotent, all-wise, merciful, and loving God created us in his image and directed into these physical bodies a part of his soul consciousness to suffer and to endure the trials and tribulations of unknown and unexpected experiences here on earth, still the question remains, “Why are we here?” and “How are mercy, love, and justice made manifest in such a plan?”</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
