<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Along_Civilizations_Trail-17</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Along_Civilizations_Trail-17" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter X</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-10" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="All-Caps"><a id="_idTextAnchor014"></a>Ancient Phoenicia</span></p>
			<p class="First-paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">R</span><span class="All-Caps">acing through bowers </span>of fragrant shrubs, and then suddenly sweeping upward to skim along the crest of rocky slopes overlooking the broad expanse of the Mediterranean, our spirits rose with each turn in the road. Not more than two hours previously we had been in Palestine, but its blue skies had been colored by our feelings, a pall of dejection had hung over us, because of our intimate experiences with its bitter revolution. How can one doubt that we mortals are torn by the strong influences of environment and our mental attitudes? The most dominant factor in life is our attitude toward things and people, our personal interpretations. If we are confident, cheerful and courageous, every obstacle is but another stride to be taken in our progress. The most sordid environment, even the darkest hour becomes but a background by which to contrast our radiant spirits. Let hope and self-assurance ebb, however, and the slightest change in circumstances becomes to us a wave of calamity by which we are completely engulfed. This but proves that the world is impartial. It never intentionally oppresses the individual nor does it favor him. Time either sweeps the individual along with it, or passes him by. The mentally alert, visionary individual is prepared to strike out and swim with the current. He is never content to bewail his lot on the bank, watching life flow by.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The Mediterranean was exceptionally blue, rather of the colored postcard hue, almost unbelievably brilliant. The sunlight seemed to dance upon its glass-like surface. This coast line of ancient Phoenicia, now Syria, was amazingly like that of California. The mountains seemed to plunge into the sea no gradual approach, but an abrupt demarcation, a bold precipice submerging itself in the waters. It was as if the parched desert far inland had, by a series of undulations, sought to reach the sea and, suddenly coming upon it, one of its crests had slipped beneath the water.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The surrounding terrain was little changed. Nowhere for miles along this coast were evidences of human progress, except for the pavement upon which we traveled. The coastal hills were uncultivated, although spotted with verdure, but, unlike our California Coast range, they were unfenced. Beautiful sandy beaches marked the erosion of the rocky shore by the sea, beaches which in a more commercialized land would have been marred by gaudy concessions. Little harbor-bays were formed by jutting rugged arms of the coast. In these still waters, about 1000 B.C., floated the sturdy, but small craft of the Phoenicians. At that time black-bearded men, who but a few centuries previous had been desert wanderers, nomads, directed the loading of the boats. They carried cargoes of mother-of-pearl inlay furniture, ivory combs, household utensils, gold trinkets, frankincense and other luxuries with which to barter with the peoples of distant countries bordering the shores of the Mediterranean. They were at that time the greatest navigators of the world. They ventured as far West as what is now Spain and carried on an extensive trade with the early Greeks who were greatly influenced by the Phoenician dress and customs. It is said that the early Greeks borrowed their style of costume from the Phoenicians. As they prospered in their trade, they colonized many towns along the coast of the eastern end of the Mediterranean.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Cars were now passing us rather frequently going in the opposite direction. We were approaching Beirut, the principal seaport of Syria, or the state of Lebanon. In a few moments we were slowly moving through the streets of this city, which was quite evidently influenced by Western ideas and practices. The change in the appearance of shop windows from those of Egypt and Palestine, the large paved thoroughfares, elaborate cafes, spacious lawns, even public trams, did not give us the impression of the Western World attempting to invade the East, but rather that it had already arrived, and the East was trying to survive the influence. Originally captured by the British in October, 1908, the country is now a French Mandated territory, but the city of Beirut is exceptionally Americanized because of the great American University now established there, whose faculty members are mainly from the United States. These instructors brought with them their manner and methods of living, and, with their families, gradually impressed the natives with their superior way of living, to which the natives have taken readily.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Our stay in Beirut was brief, for it was not our immediate destination. We were bound for the inland. Leaving the sea level we began a very steep ascent, winding our way over the high mountains. Lebanon, as this section is known, is renowned for being the site of the once famous cedar trees, by the same name, for centuries used extensively in the building operations of the ancient peoples whose countries bordered the Mediterranean. But one small grove of the great trees still remains and it is preserved as a monument of the past. Centuries before Christ, the Egyptians put out expeditions to this coast to fell the great trees and float them back to the mouth of the Nile, thence up the great river for hundreds of miles. The writer recently had the opportunity of examining thoroughly several sarcophagi (mummy coffins) being installed in the new addition of the Rosicrucian Oriental and Egyptian museum. These sarcophagi date back to approximately 1000 B.C. Each of them was made, as practically all of them were during that time, from planks of cedar brought from Lebanon, centuries ago. Even though they were about thirty centuries old, they were yet in a fair state of preservation. Many of the early fleets that plied the waters of the Mediterranean were built of the cedars of Lebanon. It was a rare wood and much sought after. Toward the South end of the Lebanon mountains, towers Mt. Hermon, reaching a height of 9000 feet. The mountain is frequently mentioned in the Christian Bible by other names. Around its base are to be found the ruins of the Temples of Baal. Generally speaking, Baal is an ancient sun god, but generically speaking, Baal was the Syrio-Phoenician word meaning God. The ancient Sidonians had named this mountain Syrion. It is without vegetation of any kind, except a plant life resembling our North American sage brush.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">To this point in our travels, our roads had been remarkably well paved and graded. Now, they narrowed and were frequently pitted. The hills were growing brown, as though they needed rain badly. The country was becoming more desolate and it had its effect upon our moods, and our conversation became less frequent. About two hours after having left Beirut, and having just made a turn on a high mountain pass, we looked down from an altitude of several thousand feet upon a broad plateau stretching into the distance. Far below our road continued, like a gray ribbon stretching for miles across the waste. Toward the horizon a great green patch was visible. Soon we were entering this patch, the outer edge of a fertile area, and the age-old city of Damascus, which is on the fringe of the great Mesopotamian desert. Damascus, 57 miles east of Beirut, has a population of about 188,000; 21,000 of which are Christians and about 160,000 Jews. It is the oldest inhabited city in the world. In the Tel-El-Amarna tablets or letters, the first letters of state in the history of the world, exchanged between Queen Nefertiti and the rulers of her subordinate states or colonies in 1350 B.C., Damascus is mentioned. At that early time, according to translations, it was termed Dimashka. The same name, referring to the same city is found inscribed on the walls of the Temple of Rameses III in Upper Egypt. It was the scene of many wars mentioned in Biblical literature. David had campaigned against it, but without a great deal of success. French troops were garrisoned there as elsewhere in Syria, but were unsuccessful in accomplishing much with Damascus, or any of Syria in fact, because of an antipathy held toward them by the native Syrians. Various political influences, which we will describe later, caused the French much unrest and a regret that they had ever assumed the mandate.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Our first impressive sight after entering this ancient city, was a large cemetery near the city‘s center, the tombs of which were fashioned like small mosques with their customary domed roofs and spiral minarets. They were so diminutive that I likened them to the ovens one sees used for the manufacturing of tile and brick. Around the whole cemetery was an artistic Byzantine brick wall, the top of which was crenellated. When our car stopped before the principal hostelry which the city afforded, located in a plaza directly across from the depot of a narrow gauge railroad originally built by Germany before World War I, and now used for the transporting of freight from Beirut to Damascus, we were greeted by a now familiar sight. Porters in white linen robes which looked not unlike the old fashioned night gown tied around the middle with a soiled red sash, and wearing Mohammedan tarbooshes, shuffled up and sought our baggage.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We paid little attention to the interior of the hotel, that is, the main foyer, until our return from our rooms above where we had immediately retired to remove some of the grime of travel. Intensely hungry, we sought the dining hall. We were ushered into a spacious interior court. Courts are exceptionally common in these Eastern countries, because they are cool, inviting and traditional. The walls were all white, against which pots of flowers and climbing vines appeared refreshingly cool. The ceiling was constructed of hand-hewn timbers. Between the tops of the walls and the ceiling was a stone grill work which allowed ample ventilation. At either end was a high, narrow window, hardly large enough to permit the passage of a man. They were well shaded and kept out the mid-day heat and glare. Most surprising was the great number of persons that were crowded in this fairly large dining hall. There must have been at least 400 persons seated at long tables somewhat like those one would find in an army or construction camp. Instead of being seated on chairs, they were seated on benches which were a part of the table. Most of the diners were in Western attire, a sack or business suit, and all wore tarbooshes. It is a custom not to remove the tarboosh when indoors, or when dining.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">An amusing incident was that all were eating as rapidly as they could, and not a sound of a voice was to be heard. No one was conversing, all intently concentrating upon the consumption of food. It seemed as though they were given a limited time to eat and could not afford to indulge in conversation. It was so different from the leisurely dining of Europe, where eating is an art and a social event as well. We later learned that it is not a custom among the Syrians and the peoples of the Levant to converse when eating, but rather to devote their attention to food first, and then converse at length afterward. I was also surprised to find a hotel so crowded in such an out of the way place as Damascus. Many of the big hostelries of America and the Western world would have been grateful for such patronage as this hotel was apparently enjoying at this time. If we had seen a similar sight in America, we would have thought a convention was in session. Conventions seemed to be such a Western mode, that we did not entertain the thought in this instance. Upon inquiry, we found that this was a momentous occasion in Syria, and that an election was to be held for the president of Syria. The hotel was more than a mere hostelry, it was used as an administration building by government officials and political parties, and in fact all of the principal affairs of state were conducted there. As soon as lunch was finished, the guests all crowded into the hallways, lounge and foyer to congregate in groups, gesticulating wildly with their hands, which is customary among a very highly emotional people such as they are.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Suddenly, while we were studying these people, who, although mainly dressed as we were, yet were so different in manner, a hush came over the entire assembly. Everyone stood rigid as though for an inspection and immediately ceased talking. We looked about to see the cause of the sudden suspension of activities and conversation. All eyes were fastened upon a large French doorway that led into the dining hall, from whence we had just come. The doors were thrust open and a dramatic entry was made, in ceremonial fashion, by a person whose very appearance indicated a regal position and birth. He was an Arab prince, we learned. He had traveled several hundred miles from a desert area over which he had dominance, to participate in these conferences and the election. He was in fact a royal nomad, a desert chieftain. He had control and direction over some 15,000 Bedouins. His costume was impressive and picturesque. He wore a heavy silken robe, full at the bottom, and the conventional Bedouin sandals inlaid with sterling silver. His turban was of a brilliant hue and affixed to his head with the argila. Around his girth he wore a twisted silk cord like a cordelier from which hung, on his left side, a beautiful dirk—although highly ornamental it undoubtedly was quite practical. His wearing of such large sun glasses was unusual. Typical of the Bedouin, his hands were quite large and gnarled. His face was long, slender, and with a large aquiline nose characteristic of the Semitic race. He spoke with a soft, vibrant voice and was very graceful in his walk. He had a definite positiveness and self-assurance, and reflected the attitude of one accustomed to respect and obedience to his least command or wish. He had descended from a long line of nobility. In the open desert his word was absolute law. He was the highest court of appeal and made decisions which would shape the course of the lives of those who depended on him.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In this election which was now taking place, he could have easily influenced the thousands who were his followers and subjects to vote as he wished, for either candidate. Looking neither to the right nor left, he strode out of the hotel toward a waiting carriage, followed by his personal bodyguards, two huge members of his race, dressed like himself, but not having such ornamentation because of their lesser station. In addition to carrying dirks, the bodyguards also wore, crisscrossed over their chests, bandoliers containing large calibre shells, and slung across each of their backs was a modem repeating rifle. Becoming more curious about the situation we determined to learn further facts. Later that evening we made the acquaintance of the British Vice Consul of Damascus, who frequented our hotel because it was the center of local social life, and because the few foreigners or Europeans who visited Damascus for a brief stay, whether on business or pleasure, located there.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">France, we learned, was anxious to make Syria profitable to her—to develop it in some way so that it would not become an enormous expense or burden to the home land, as it very evidently now was. She could not, however, gain the confidence and respect of the people of Syria—primarily because of her foreign policies and her refusal to oblige her officials, both military and diplomatic, who were stationed there, to learn the native language. It is related that she considers it beneath French dignity and obliges the natives to learn French, if they wish to transact any business or affairs with her. This attitude caused a resentment which could not be bridged over by any protestations of friendliness. On the other hand, two other interests were seeking control in Syria. Turkey, who during the Ottoman Empire reigned supreme in Syria, as almost everywhere else in the Levant, had her agents constantly fomenting discord and dissatisfaction among the people, agitating against France and urging an overthrow of the French mandate and the return of Syria to Turkish rule. The more intelligent of the Syrians oppose this move. They either recall experiences with Turkey in the past or are very familiar with the history of Syria under Turkish domination, and they desire Syrian independence, a complete Nationalistic government.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">One of the two candidates for president was definitely a tool of the French government, and would have been in accord with any move France wished to make. The other candidate was said to be a tool of the Nationalist party that sought complete independence from France. The Nationalist party dared not run one of its own principal supporters, for France would have definitely prevented the election. The tool of the Nationalist party had to appear to be sympathetic toward France, but as we later learned, was really powerless to speak and act without consulting his supporters.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The president-elect of Syria resided at our hotel, and by a coincidence his quarters were directly across from ours. He was a small man, one who appeared to be more impressed with his own importance than with the welfare of the state. He was an enthusiastic motion picture fan, particularly upon those occasions when the only theatre of the city exhibited news reels in which he appeared. The local cinema was in the same block and only about two doors from the main entrance of the hotel, yet upon his frequent weekly visits to it, a car of state would pull up to the main entrance of the hotel, the president’s uniformed military guard of six would stand at attention and present arms, while he entered the car and was driven about 400 feet further down the block. Then the car would stop, the military guard would march up to it, stand at attention, and again present arms while he left the car. At the end of the performance the whole ceremony was repeated. It was like a scene from a comic opera.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It seems as though the citizenry know the status of the situation and more respect and awe were shown for the Bedouin chieftain, and for the principal political supporter of the National party, the power behind the scenes, who used the hotel lobby and foyer for his consultations. This political leader and hero of the National party, who is said to pull the strings that actuate the president, is a very intellectual type—eyes far apart, deep set, visionary, dreamy made dramatic mannerisms.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">He had been incarcerated a number of times by the French authorities for inconsequential offenses, mainly, of course, for political reasons. He was the author of a number of books having considerable circulation in Syria and elsewhere, written mainly to reveal the purported oppression of Syria. One often reads of these political fracases and intrigues, but one very seldom has the opportunity to see them demonstrated and enacted in such intimate quarters as the lobby of a hotel, and so openly disclosed. Syria, politically, has not yet acquired the subtleties or diplomacies of her larger sister nations of the world where the same things occur, but are rather more carefully staged.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
