<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Along_Civilizations_Trail-18</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Along_Civilizations_Trail-18" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter XI</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-11" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="All-Caps"><a id="_idTextAnchor015"></a>The Oldest Inhabited City of the World</span></p>
			<p class="First-paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">O</span><span class="All-Caps">ur next day </span>was spent mainly in making preliminary preparations for Mr. Brower’s and my departure for the strange land of Babylonia, known as Iraq or Mesopotamia. The following day was devoted to photographing some of the historic sites of this most historic city of Damascus with our Graphlex still camera. We visited the “Street Called Straight,” a very long and actually very straight street, which bisects the city from the Eastern to the Western gate, a street which has been in existence for several centuries. The major portion of this street is covered over with an arched ceiling, forming an arcade in which there are occasional skylights permitting a soft light which penetrates the dust and smoke fumes from the bazaars and shops below. On either side of the narrow street are little shops, most of them mere closets or cubbyholes, niches in the wall, over the entrances of which are suspended striped awnings of vivid hue.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The proprietors are frequently in native costume. Chamber sit on their haunches before their shops, with knees up under the chin—the most uncomfortable posture for a Westerner, or one unaccustomed to it—or they sit upon small stools, the seats of which are of woven fibre, like the stools of antiquity, or strips of leather. As you pass, they pull at your garments or run in front of you trying to block your way in as gracious a manner as they possibly can, endeavoring to have you turn and enter their shops. If they think you are English or American, or if they understand any English whatsoever, they cry “best goods,” meaning that their particular bazaar or shop contains the best wares of its kind. The “best goods” cry, of course, is not to be relied upon, for four or five doors further on another one of these shops, with equal service and wares, can be found.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The city of Damascus has long been noted for its steel. A particular process was used by the early Damascans in making steel which caused it to be renowned among the ancients. Excellent cutlery, knives, swords and dirks, marvelous examples of craftsmanship, may be purchased at ridiculously small prices, if one is accustomed to buying in these bazaars, which means not purchasing at the first price demanded. The Syrians are also noted for their native candy which has a remarkable combination of flavors and is very attractively prepared. If one can overlook the methods of making it, and uncleanliness is not too repulsive to him, the candy is very enjoyable. A number of the bazaars specialized in the sale of rugs, hand-woven and having beautiful hues and a variety of design which would delight any lover of Oriental rugs. Although the prices were considerably less than any we had seen previously, these rugs were yet much higher in price than those which we were to see later on.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In the center of the city is a great mosque, originally a Christian church built by Constantine. Around the mosque are the original walls built by the crusaders. They are still in an excellent state of preservation. One enters the great arched gateway, and there before him is an enormous plaza of original flagging. The high wall surrounding it has, on each of its four corners, a minaret tower from which the Meuzzin, a Mohammedan priest, calls the faithful to prayer several times daily with his musical chant. The area within the walls would comprise the equivalent of at least three or four of our modern city blocks or squares. In this area are also two or three small buildings, some partly in ruins, which are now shrines because of some historical significance. The great mosque itself is to the left of the court and runs the full length of it. There are several entrances typical of Byzantine architecture. We were amazed upon entering to find an enormous room without partitions and supported by Byzantine columns or spiral columns, graceful, tall and impressive. These columns supported timbers, upon which the flat stone roof rested. The entire area of this great space which must have been at least 500 feet in length and about 100 feet in width was covered by rare Oriental rugs, not only rare because of excellent material and design, but because they were several centuries old. One of them was the largest single woven rug I have ever seen. It did not consist of several sewn together. It was one continuous weaving and was nearly 200 feet in length and the complete width of the structure. Although showing considerable wear, it was still in an excellent condition. By a rubbing of the hand over the surface of the rug and brushing the nap back, in a few moments the original colors would return with brilliance. We were informed that a wealthy English nobleman some fifty years ago had offered the Mohammedans of Damascus ten thousand pounds, or about $50,000.00 for this rug and the Mohammedans were quite offended, because no price would be accepted for such a rug, having been so long in such a sacred place.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Toward one end of this great room were four wooden shafts, like posts, reaching to the roof from the stone floor. Around these shafts which were set about eight feet apart, forming an eight foot square, was an Arabian grillwork of wood, through which one could look. The floor of the center was a mosaic, the colors were a delicate pastel shade, and the design consisted of flowers, vines, and clusters of grapes. On the center of this mosaic floor sat a small gold chest, about two feet in length, one foot wide, and about eighteen inches high, apparently of hand-beaten gold. Our curiosity was naturally aroused by the special prominence given this chest and we engaged one of the Moslems in conversation. Speaking fair English he advised us that the chest was supposed to contain the head of St. John, the Baptist, and beneath the mosaic floor was the tomb of St. John, the Baptist. It may seem strange to many Christians to know that St. John the Baptist, as an individual, is venerated by these Moslems as well as by the Christians, not because he was a Christian but because he was a holy man to them because of his deeds, and the accomplishments of his life were highly respected by the Mohammedans. No one has ever opened this chest, according to historians, to determine whether or not it does contain a skull which might be in some way identified with St. John, the Baptist. Whether or not St. John, the Baptist s remains are beneath the mosaic floor no one knows, but history does recount the legend that St. John the Baptist was entombed there.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Our journey carried us through a number of little winding cobblestone streets, all filled with small bazaars and shops, and containing a jostling crowd of jabbering citizens, who turned to stare at us. Foreigners, particularly Europeans and Americans, do not frequent Damascus since it is far off the popular tourist track. Those few who do come do not go into the native quarters, as we were doing. We finally stopped before a large wall, more rightly the side of a building. It was covered with a white stucco, badly soiled and which had broken away in part, exposing mud brick behind it, with an occasional natural stone protruding. We walked to the entrance way which consisted of two large wooden doors, planks hung on crude hinges, suggesting no evidence of the beauty and quaint interior we were to see.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">When the doors were opened, we unconsciously gave vent to words and phrases that indicated our pleasure at what we saw. Before us was one of the most attractive gardens I have ever had the pleasure of viewing. It was not as elaborate or as expansive as many of the spacious lawns and gardens which we find in America or England—in fact, it was rather small, but it was as though we were looking at an old Persian print, or as though there had materialized before us, a scene out of the Arabian Nights. Here was a true Persian Garden, such as fabled in song and story. In the center was a mosaic pool. The artistic design consisted of Arabic characters and geometric symbols. The center of the pool had a bubbling fountain. In its center were lotus and water lilies and water plants with which we were not familiar. The flagging which was uneven in the courtyard was of a variety of stones of beautiful natural colors, some a light shade of blue, some terra cotta, some slate, some almost as black and shiny as onyx. About the flagging were large vases, terra cotta, evidently hand-made, because they were not of uniform shape or size, and did not sit level on the flooring. Some of them showed indentations, traces of the potter’s fingerprints, and in these vases there were growing shrubs and flowers of brilliant hues, and vines which climbed the walls and high windows.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Toward one end of this patio—or more properly Persian garden, and of which we were to see many in the near future—was an arched walk. Stepping up onto the walk and walking its extreme length, we entered another doorway into a very small, but high chamber, which housed a huge sarcophagus which was quite plain, without color or design. In fact, the tomb chamber itself was without any ornamentation, without any splendor of any sort, and yet it contained the remains of one of the most famous characters in history and the most beloved by the Mohammedans. It was the tomb of Saladin who lived between 1158 and 1193, A.D. and who died in this city of Damascus. He was a great military lord and defender of the Moslem faith and renowned for his opposition to the crusaders. Although fierce in warfare, in actual combat, he was noted not only for his bravery, but for his kindness to prisoners, to the men, women and children whom he captured, and for his high idealism. His word was his bond and he countenanced no lies or treachery. He despised the breaking of promises which was common among many of the crusader leaders, who would resort to any means to accomplish their end in the name of Christianity.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Our party was to be further divided in Damascus. Frater and Soror Shibley had remained in Jerusalem, Frater Brower and I were to take our elaborate cinema camera equipment and photographic apparatus and paraphernalia with us further East on our venture across the Mesopotamian desert. Soror Gladys Lewis was to remain in Damascus, awaiting our return some ten days later. Damascus was hardly the place to leave an unescorted American or European woman. Even native Syrian women were infrequently seen out of doors, or in public places, except when escorted by their husbands or some male member of their immediate families. On such occasions they were veiled. American and European women are accustomed to greater freedom and dislike being confined, and yet it would be obviously dangerous to go about these bazaars and the native district, and even the main thoroughfares, without an escort. Soror Lewis, however, insisted that we proceed as scheduled, so we prepared for our departure, and one of the most exciting adventures we were to experience on our entire journey. We retired early that night, as we were to leave at sunrise the next morning.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
