<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Along_Civilizations_Trail-7</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Along_Civilizations_Trail-7" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Chapter-Title-Split"><span class="All-Caps">Introduction</span></p>
			<p class="First-paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">N</span><span class="All-Caps">o one people </span>or race in the world’s history stands alone as civilized. If any single nation or people is to be designated as representing civilization, then all organized society since the advent of reason must likewise bear the same distinction. Civilization is neither a state into which humanity is suddenly precipitated, nor is it indigenous to a location or race, nor confined to a period of history. Further, it is not attained by a people as a consequent reward for some conduct or sacrifices made. It is a gradual growth, more appropriately an <span class="Italic-Basic">evolutionary process </span>that has existed since the beginning of all human society.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The underlying factors of civilization are to be found wherever people have striven together and exchanged the results of their efforts. To point out a people as civilized is not to proclaim what they have materialized, but whether the factors existed in their society. If, for example, it is agreed that a man is in motion when he runs, because motion, by its nature, no matter what its extent, differs from inertia, then by the same reasoning, when man walks or even crawls he is likewise moving. This evolutionary process of civilization is one of refinement—a refinement of human existence. The refinement in its aspects is twofold. One phase is the <span class="Italic-Basic">external</span> and the other we may term the <span class="Italic-Basic">internal</span>. This external refinement is brought about by man’s relationship to the world in which he lives. In its rudest form, this relationship consists of utilizing the elements and resources of nature to satisfy his elemental desires and appetites. In other words, a primitive mind does not appraise the things of earth because of their inherent beauty or because of any realization of the majesty of their underlying natural laws. They are seized upon or avoided only as the fundamental urges of man’s being cause him to be aware of their effect upon him. Thus a savage will climb a tree when hungry to pluck wild fruit, but neither the tree nor the fruit suggests anything else to his mind than appeasement of his appetite.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The use of nature’s resources requires exertion and expenditure of effort. This exertion to which man is put is likewise of two definite kinds. The first may be classified as instinctive. This is defined as that exertion which is without volition, without decision, and not of the influence of our will. It is a reflex action, a simple, inherent method of response to a stimulus unconsciously formed. Such exertion is displayed when we jump when startled by a sudden loud noise or touch upon the back by one whose presence was not known. The other kind of exertion is that effort which is <span class="Italic-Basic">intentionally expended </span>to accomplish an end. Such efforts are causative. They are expended to produce something desired. We consequently have control over such exertions. They constitute our willful acts. The satisfaction we may derive from the expenditure of such efforts is but an incidental to that expected from the result. The savage, moved to climb a tree to pluck an apple, is not concerned with the pleasures, if any, to be derived from climbing, but in eating the apple when it is secured. In fact, most efforts expended to gain an end prove to be, in themselves, annoying, irritating, sometimes fatiguing, and more often just endurable. These willful efforts are just <span class="Italic-Basic">necessary exertions.</span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The aspect of external refinement of which civilization consists, then, is the reduction of the effort necessary for any accomplishment. A people which is said to be displaying signs of being civilized will reveal in its habits and ways of living a gradual departure from the crudest methods for gaining an end. This external refinement is a process of improvement of man’s relationship to the physical world. Material civilization, by this reasoning, is found to be a simplification of the methods of living, combined, however, with an expansion of its joys. Concisely, then, the results of material civilization are found to exist in a <span class="Italic-Basic">minimum </span>of effort to live, and a <span class="Italic-Basic">maximum</span> of the fruits of living. When this is applied to the former analogy of the apple tree, we find the civilized man having easier access by a ladder, for example, to the higher limbs of the tree, and further, being able at the same time to obtain more apples.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Whether this external refinement of man’s relationship to the world, namely, physical civilization, as we shall call it, has made any progress, need not be a matter of conjecture. It can easily be determined by a comparison of the events, habits and customs of today with those chronicled in history. The advancement of twentieth century civilization in this respect is quite apparent. One cannot help, for example, but be fully cognizant of the great advantages of conserving effort in tilling the soil when using a tractor, as compared with the hoe culture of the ancient Sumerians. However, hoe culture in itself is a trend and product of civilization; it is a definite advance over those centuries of darkness when man was incapable of even that simple form of earth culture. The spirit that moved men forty centuries ago to erect great stone temples along the banks of the Nile, with their majestic hypostyles, is no less or ruder than that which causes men today to construct the steel skyscrapers which tower heavenward.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">If we think—and if, in fact—our modern achievements excel those of the ages that have gone before, it is only because men of today have had the added advantage of a vast heritage of experience upon which to draw. These experiences, when added to the natural resources of an area in which people dwell, are an asset that their progenitors did not possess. A boy cannot be called a poor specimen of a man, for the latter has attributes which are not natural to the former. The technique of living, the methods of refinement of man’s relationship to nature, comprises a valuable and very useful asset which is the added advantage an intelligent man in every age has. If this were not so, native intelligence alone would be sufficient in each age for man to rise higher than the preceding level of civilization, and there would not need to exist the assiduous attempt to preserve the arts and sciences, to hand them down to future generations. He who laughs at the efforts of men before his time is indicting them for having been born in their age. The minds of each age began where their predecessors left off.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The scientists of today, closeted in physics laboratories and wrestling with the complex technical problems of television, display no more native intelligence than did Archimedes, the mathematician of the third millennium B.C. The Archimedean screw which he devised and which, by rotating on an inclined axis, raised water from one level to another by a mechanical means for the first time in the history of the world required a profundity of original thought equal to what the best minds of today may offer.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The other aspect of civilization, which we chose to call the internal, is the refinement of man himself. Civilization is more than physical environment. A savage may reside within the shadow of a great cathedral or library, and his temperament and comportment be untouched by their influence. Likewise, a civilized man may reside in a savage environment, as, for instance, if he be marooned upon an uninhabited island. Civilization consists of the unity of internal and external refinement. When one exists without the other, it is incomplete.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Physiologically there is no quality or attribute that distinguishes the savage from the civilized man. Mechanically and structurally they are the same. Physically, one may be superior at one time or another; this is dependent upon prevailing topographical and geographical conditions. Thus a modern athlete may be in better health and a more superb specimen physically than some of the present-day savage tribesmen who periodically suffer from malnutrition and ignorant abuse of their bodies. On the other hand, some aborigines, as the primitive Ethiopians for example, are excellent types of virile manhood and put modem civilized men to shame physically.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Psychologically, however, there is a vast gulf between the civilized, cultured individual and the savage. The savage is at all times moved only by the most primitive and powerful forces of his nature. He obeys only the waves of passions and appetites engendered by his instincts which surge over him. Each act is egocentric. If it will not culminate in a personal gratification, it is not entertained. In fact, only negative efforts are expended. Such acts are not committed because of their own merit, but because of a need to quiet a disturbing sensation of some kind which provokes them.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Civilization, then, in its <span class="Italic-Basic">internal refinement</span>, as in its primitive external phase, is closely bound to individual exertion. Every effort expended is principally required among primitive people for the preservation of life, the providing for sustenance and shelter and the protection of self against the ravages of the elements, beasts and man. Life consists of a series of cycles of intense pains and pleasures. One is always contiguous upon the other. Life is hardly ever upon an even plane. Consciousness is precipitated from one extreme of sensations to the other. The world of sensation, to the savage mind, is like a great symphonic orchestra in which the brasses are played so loudly that the soft and sweeter tones of the other instruments become inaudible. The lesser emotions of the savage’s being are completely submerged and unexpressed. They can never rise with strength enough to reach the threshold of consciousness. Because of this, none of the finer sentiments which the reason attaches to these more delicate emotions are ever developed; consequently, the very savage human is never aware of such feelings as loyalty, justice and pride. The consciousness, being at all times agitated only by the grosser sensations of the appetites and the instincts, is incapable of sensitivity to those impulses which form our sentiments and our estimation of the good.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A reduction of the effort to cope with environment or the gradual development of an ease in living makes for leisure periods, periods of mental passivity, free of exhaustion or any intense sensations. It is during such states that the mind has receptivity to the finer feelings which bring about the <span class="Italic-Basic">refinement of self</span>—civilized man. A human who is not obliged to endure hours of rigorous hunting and fighting while experiencing gnawing pangs of hunger will not drop from sheer exhaustion, neither will he gorge himself into a soporific stupor. There will be intervals when his consciousness will respond to new and perhaps, to him, strange feelings aroused by conditions within and about him, to which, hitherto, he never gave his attention.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It must not be presumed, from this, that a prolific nature, where life naturally thrives, is essential to civilization. In fact, the combination of an ideal climate and lush vegetation with its plentitude of natural foods is really an obstacle to civilization. A people whose existence began in an extremely favorable environment, where little or no effort is required to gain sustenance, and where no dangers or rigors of life are encountered, even though it is afforded greater leisure, is incapable of an appreciation of those finer emotions which rise to the border of its consciousness. Where life is offered resistance, but where the struggle for life is not continuous or too severe, the faculties of the individual are challenged, and by their use are developed. Opposition to desires sharpens the wits and develops the reason. The consciousness becomes more acute, and is consequently more susceptible to those impressions of the finer emotions. Where there is not a sensitive mind, there is not the ability to evaluate the delicate emotions, to form the sentiments, even if they were experienced. In the South Seas are to be found people who, though primitive in their method of living because of the abundance and conduciveness to life of nature, are quite amicable and peaceful in their conduct. However, there is no advancement, no refinement of self or of their external world that could be considered the factors of a civilization. There is no attempt to expand the benefits of life, which we have seen is one of the characteristic achievements of a civilized people.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It can be seen, therefore, that through external refinement, the modification of environment, precedes internal refinement, one is never truly a civilized individual until he is moved by the higher sentiments which can more rightly be called the morals. In a true state of civilization, where there is that lessening of the expenditure of effort to preserve life and provide its fundamental needs, there is also an increasing moral effort. The morals establish ideals which become ends sought, just as food is sought to satisfy hunger. Effort is expended to realize these ideals, and the individual’s nature is refined, as were the things outside of himself. Whereas external refinement was principally motivated by necessity, a transition takes place and man chooses to pursue the moral ideals. One may, for example, find it necessary to devise a better means of trapping game, but it cannot be said that when he beautifies his dwelling he is actuated by necessity. It can be positively declared that the decadence of a civilization begins when the effort to obtain the necessities of life is diminished to a minimum and there is no corresponding effort to attain moral idealism.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">A strong civilization is one where the rise of moral effort equals the reduction in effort for physical existence. This becomes more of an individual or family responsibility than one of society’s. A man who in his youth or early manhood experiences some of the rigors of livelihood has the opportunity to develop a moral sense and a strength of character by the demands made upon his faculties and moral self. When, then, a state of prosperity or greater ease of living is acquired, he is then fortified so that he may divert his efforts into the higher channels of moral idealism which make for the cultured, civilized, the self-restrained man. Where great wealth is inherited, and the individual is born with the proverbial silver spoon in his mouth, the intelligence is never apt to be really stimulated and the mind never fully appreciates or rightly evaluates the sentiments, and consequently a savage disposition may be clothed in silken raiment. There are, of course, exceptions to this. Riches too easily acquired in early life are equivalent in their harmful influence to a large inherited wealth. The individual has not, in such cases, had sufficient time to develop concepts for the governing of his life, based upon his morals. The great influx of wealth brought about by the conquests in which the individual himself did not participate or expend effort brought about the decadence of the Roman Empire.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There can be no inertia for man. He cannot be physically, mentally, and morally inactive alike, without becoming degenerate. A <span class="Italic-Basic">corrupt civilization</span> is far worse than savagery. The former finds pleasure in perversity, while the other is compelled to action by forces beyond its control and understanding. When moral idealism falls in a higher state of civilization, the lower nature of the individual becomes dominant. Passions and appetites reign supreme and the individual has in addition the power of the highly organized means of society to satisfy them more ruthlessly. He has, in other words, all of the attributes of civilization at his disposal, the products of its arts and sciences, and they are used not in further refinement of self or the world, but in self-destruction—in war. When moral idealism declines, the products of civilization are eventually turned against it.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In going back “Along Civilization’s Trail” We find the refinement of man’s world and the refinement of self-vying with each other for supremacy instead of keeping pace. A great military, industrial and economic strength have often been eventually acquired at the expense of the character of a people. Wherever this has occurred, the trail has been eventually marked by the ruins of another <span class="Italic-Basic">fallen civilization.</span> There will be seen a debris of a people, as well as their monuments. In this book it is hoped the reader will observe the historical evidences of the cause of this rise and fall of character as well as nations.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
