<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Along_Civilizations_Trail-22</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Along_Civilizations_Trail-22" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter XV</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-15" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="All-Caps"><a id="_idTextAnchor020"></a>I Relive a Life</span></p>
			<p class="First-paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">W</span><span class="All-Caps">e both concentrated </span>our digging and probing in the one place in which we had made our discovery. We were soon rewarded for our efforts and we turned up brick after brick, each weighing about ten pounds, all deeply and clearly inscribed in cuneiform, some bearing the inscription of Nebuchadnezzar’s name. Turning them over, we saw that they had a sticky black substance smeared on them. “Looks and smells like asphaltum,” said Brower.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">“It is,” I replied, “the Babylonians had asphalt or bitumen pits, and they used this substance to coat their bricks just as we use the same material today as a preservative on our roads and highways. And you will observe,” I continued, “that it has done an excellent job.” We hurried, for the hour was getting late, to reduce the size of the bricks—because of their weight—with a hammer we had for the purpose. We knocked away all except the area containing the inscriptions. We soon had a very representative collection, and one quite heavy. We intended to take them back with us to America for the Rosicrucian Museum. In fact, they are now part of the collection to be seen in the Babylonian and Assyrian gallery of the Rosicrucian Museum.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In this same palace where we were making our discoveries an outstanding tragedy had happened. Alexander the Great, after successfully putting to rout the army of Darius, the Persian king who occupied Babylon at that time, and taking over Babylon himself, was murdered in this palace at the height of his power, and, it is said, while in a drunken stupor. Near here, in this series of earth mounds, was the ruins of a library. Ashurbanipal, last Assyrian king, and grandson of Sennacherib, built himself a great library at Nineveh, Assyrian city located north of the present city of Baghdad. This was centuries before the great Alexandrian library of the Greeks. He had thousands of clay tablets inscribed in cuneiform writing placed in jars. These stone books, for this is what they were, were placed in rows on shelves, properly classified. There were thousands of them, devoted to the subjects of science, history, various phases of literature and religion. Hanging from the top of each was a little straw tag giving the title of the tablet, or the subject of the book. Some of these books were later filed in a library in Babylon, and they have not yet been discovered.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The great library of Nineveh has been found; that is how we know of these books and their classification, and most of its stone books which lay in a heap when the building crumbled are now in the British Museum in London. On some of these tablets are found parts of the story of the flood mentioned in the Old Testament. The legend, as it also appears in the Old Testament, tells of the hero building a large boat on which he took his wife and a pair of each of the animals, and that all other humans, and animals were destroyed by the deluge, and that finally when the flood subsided, he and his wife and the animals were left to perpetuate themselves as the only living things. This story is undoubtedly based upon an actual local flood within that region, and of course it was thought by the early writers to have been a deluge of the whole world. It was passed perhaps by word of mouth, or even by tablet, to the Egyptians, thence to the Hebrews, and it was finally incorporated in the Christian literature.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We loaded our camera equipment into the car, also the inscribed stones, for our porter would not help us with them. They were to him taboo; that is, untouchable. A curse, so the natives believed, would be inflicted upon those who disturbed the property of the dead. The Assyrians, like the Egyptians, threatened trespassers and those who would violate their sacred precincts with oaths of vengeance. Ashurbanipal, for example, declared in cuneiform writing on each stone tablet of his library (each book in other words), that whosoever shall carry off this tablet or shall inscribe his name upon it side by side with my own, may Assur and Belit (gods) overthrow him in wrath and anger, and may they destroy his name and posterity in the land. Now we began to realize why they feared to visit this site. Strange, too, since working in the palace rooms I felt rather ill. My heart was palpitating. I could no longer control physical evidence of the intense excitement I felt, the uncontrollable feeling of suspense—as though any moment something unforgettable was about to occur. Beads of cold perspiration stood out on my forehead, unusual for this climate. I felt exceptionally tired. My head throbbed slightly. I laughed to myself, and said, the power of suggestion.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Relieved of our burdens, we climbed over several mounds to another large pile of crumbling brick. It is referred to by some authorities as the remains of the Tower of Babel, mentioned in the Old Testament. The Babylonians, contrary to popular knowledge, built many large towers. The one to which the Old Testament refers was just one of many similar structures. The predecessors of the Babylonians were the Sumerians, a people who came from a mountain land far to the north, and finally settled on this plain which they named the Plain of Shinar. In their home land they worshiped in temples on mountain tops a god named Enlil. He was the god of the earth. To simulate the mountain temples they built great tower temples which were cube-like in shape. The base was nearly as large in area as the height of the structure. Surrounding the base was a great stone courtyard. On one side three large inclines or ramps made it possible to reach the first two levels of the tower, and from there a gradual incline continued around the entire structure, making it possible to reach the tower top. On the top was the actual temple itself in which dwelt the priests, and in which the ceremonies were conducted.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Koldewey, German excavator and archaeologist, has reconstructed, from the plans he made of the ruins of Babylonian tower temples, complete models showing how they actually appeared in ancient times. The highest of these towers was probably some four hundred feet, which, like the great Pyramid of Gizeh, looked by comparison to the surrounding level terrain much greater. Of course, to the captive Hebrews, this god of the Babylonians was a false one, and the worship of him on such a high edifice, reaching, it seemed, into the clouds, was a defiling of the sanctuary of their own god, consequently the story of the Tower of Babel. These tower temples contributed to later architecture and were first copied during the Hellenistic period. The world’s first lighthouse, on Pharos Island, outside the ancient port of Alexandria, Egypt, was a copy of these tower temples. It, in turn, became the model for the Mohammedan minarets. In the Babylonian-Assyrian Gallery of the Rosicrucian Museum, which collection is now one of the largest in Western United States, is a great number of these tablets and cones having inscribed on them liturgies and commercial correspondence; all of which were removed from the ruins of these ancient temples.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">As we pondered among these ruins, in our mind s eye we could see the Hebrew slaves, naked except for loin cloth, with matted hair and beards, fettered with bronze chains and anklets, toiling, sweating, and stumbling in their misery and near exhaustion, in the blazing sun under the lash of the whips of their Babylonian captors, making and carrying the brick which was raising a tower for the worship of the god of their oppressors, offering prayers silently for their deliverance—prayers, the echoes of which still ring in the chapters of the Old Testament. Cruelty, yes. Unnecessary—yes, also. But the custom neither began with the Babylonians nor did it end with them. This much can be said of the Babylonians: Their persecution of the Jews was not primarily a religious one, but a political one. Judea being a subordinate state and a rebellious one, its warriors became political prisoners of the Babylonians, not religious ones. Other prisoners were treated likewise by them. Today, now, the Jew s suffer persecution again, but in this day and age it is not principally political persecution but religious or racial persecution, which is a far greater reflection upon the level of intelligence of an age than the punishment of a people because of political uprising.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I now felt rather faint—yet I was surprised that I was not alarmed at my condition. There was a proclivity to let go—to slip into either sleep or oblivion. To watch Frater Brower and listen to him seemed such an effort. On the other side of my objective consciousness, and seemingly deep within, was an appealing sense of ease, of comfort, of relaxation, that tugged strongly at my consciousness. The world around me was perturbing. I was like one on a threshold of a portal leading to a chamber of quiet and soothing atmosphere, and yet reluctant to cross over and leave my present distraction. The struggle was tremendous—but objectively I was losing. It was too difficult to draw myself back into my immediate surroundings. I must submit to the impelling urge. With that ultimate resignation came not just gratification but afflatus. Ethereal throngs pushed by me, jostled me. Familiar sounds came to my ears. Was I now awakening from a dream? There before me were the citizenry of my home land going to and fro, attired as I had always seen them, occupied with their daily interests I so well knew. I was with them—and yet I was an unseen spectator. Vaguely I recalled another place and different peoples But to think of them, place them, was now an effort. And why try? Here I belonged—in Babylon. I did not want to participate in the activities before me just to drink them in, and each sound and sight gave me new life, seemed to lift a burden from my soul, and my spirits rose. I could remain this way forever, yet something was continually annoying me—a voice, faint, distant, but distinct, kept calling me. I could not avoid it. If I listened, this joyous procession of my friends, Babylon itself, to which I had just returned, became hazy. I decided to get away from this voice, to move along with people about me, to be myself again, to enter into their spirit and mood. I rose, but I seemed to float; surprising to me, yet a pleasure, was the sensation. Here then was a pleasing freedom. I could mingle with the throngs unobserved. I could satisfy my curiosity as I entered the various craftsmen’s stalls. I was amused at the conversations I overheard as I stood with the spectators who watched the armorer fashion new shields, and who lamented the added weight and reminisced when leather was sufficient for even the king s guards to protect their persons when doing battle. I sauntered on, to come to rest before an aged lapidary worker. Around him were grouped his keen-eyed and agile apprentices. I marveled again, yes, as I had on many occasions, at the symmetry of design and the details carved in such hard stone and with such unvarying accuracy. I was proud of the age in which I lived—for had we not advanced far? Certainly long shall we endure. Nowhere, not perhaps even in the land of the tyrants of Mizraim, are men as progressive as we. I looked up in admiration at the magnificent varicolored tiled walls of the Great King s Palace. They sparkled like the rays emanating from Marduk when they plunged into the waters of the canals. I turned to watch the orderly steps of a squad of stalwart bowmen as they passed to enter the portals of the sacred way of the Goddess Ishtar. Above my head and fastened to the mass of inner walls which secured our city, beloved of the God Marduk, against the ravages of the Northern invaders, was a proclamation to all free men guaranteeing them the protection of the God of living things and his earthly ambassador, my most powerful and glorious king. I had achieved, my tongue could express itself in signs, my words could go far beyond the sound of my voice. I could read as well. Few could equal me. I had read, and I had written often; my livelihood depended on my writing. My words shall live beyond my time. I recalled how I was often sought to leave my message with my seal impressed, with those who wished to ponder over my thoughts. I was more than a scribe bound to the Temple or the court of the King—I was a counselor on the ways of living. It was my art to translate into understandable language, into a code of practice and into a useful order of living, the enigmatic words of Marduk which his priests spake high in the tower temples. I was not unaware that I was disliked, envied, possibly feared. The mighty of Marduk’s sacerdotal army resented my intervention, my mediation between them and my fellows. I was not of their holy sect. I was not appointed for ministrations to God, yet I spake and wrote words of wisdom as I knew them. My thoughts were just of earth, of man. However, I took comfort that my words in writing had been commanded for examination by the great Lord and King. He had favorably accepted them, for had he not given me reward and the generous sanction allowed one who is honored as a sage? He had encouraged me in an epistle from his supreme minister to freely give my thoughts animation and permanency—but to be ever mindful that I did not offend Marduk, creator of all, and himself, Babylonia’s Lord and King.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Again, once again, that fretful disturbance, that distant echo, that now indistinct cry, seemed to possess me. I shook my head repeatedly as though trying to shake off some physical bondage. Then the sound of my name crashed down upon me like a bolt of lightning. It shattered the vista before me; towers, palaces, streets, peoples, slaves—they all fell into mere parts like a jigsaw puzzle dropped abruptly on pavement. They melted before my eyes, and through the mist there appeared the face of Frater Brower. He was speaking, but his voice was still distant; then it gradually grew stronger as though it were approaching me from afar. He was shaking me by the shoulder and saying, “What is the matter with you? Why don’t you answer me? We must get back. Are you ill? You are extremely pale.” I realize now that I must have been in a state of semi-consciousness. Objectively I had not been aware for several minutes, perhaps, of my actual surroundings. For while I had this vivid experience, this transition to an era of nearly four thousand years ago, my body had been seated right where it now was, on the sub-foundation wall of this tower temple. And yet, how clear had been my experience in all its details! Hardly like an hallucination that comes from an ordinary lapse of objective consciousness. I was ill, extremely so; I burned with fever. My mouth was parched and I was badly nauseated.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Two thoughts now dominated my consciousness. First, over and over again, like a leer, the words of the Babylonian execration imploring the gods to punish despoilers coursed through my mind. I attempted to ridicule myself as I lay in the back of the bouncing car heading again toward Baghdad. I thought of the dozen or more volumes I had read quoting the authorities of the world, and of the Rosicrucian teachings, all of which discredited this superstitious belief, yet mocking me was this ailment, the discomfitures of which gave the oaths a more vivid realism to my semi-delirious mind than anything which I could recall having read or studied. Reason gave way to fantasy. I pictured myself as the victim whose life was to be given to prove the mysterious potency of these ancient curses. I had been chosen to vindicate the Babylonians, to discredit the stigma modern science had placed upon the forces which they were said to invoke! Second was the realization that all I was now perceiving in this awakened state seemed more unreal, more dreamlike than what I had just experienced. In fact, I felt that instead of returning to normalcy I had lapsed into delirium, and that the preceding occurrences were my natural state—I even yearned to return to them. The details of what I had seen and heard clung to my memory like a deep fragrance to the air after flowers have been removed. Reason told me that I had, during the entire time, been seated on that mud-brick foundation, and yet I knew, a conviction that I could not shake, that my inner consciousness had relived, not in imagination but in memory, what it had once registered as an actual experience.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Several days of quiet, after a diagnosis of my case as mild tropical fever combined with intestinal influenza, caused possibly by an insect bite on the desert, saw me rally sufficiently to prepare for the trek back across the desert. Our trail was now to lead northward and westward like the flow of the ancient civilization whose sites we had been visiting.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
