<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>Along_Civilizations_Trail-12</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="Along_Civilizations_Trail-12" xml:lang="en-US">
		<div class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			<p class="Header">Chapter V</p>
			<p id="_idParaDest-5" class="Chapter-Title"><span class="All-Caps"><a id="_idTextAnchor007"></a>Prophecy Day in the Great Pyramid</span></p>
			<p class="First-paragraph"><span class="_idGenDropcap-1">T</span><span class="All-Caps">hough an extremely </span>inviting breakfast bad been prepared for us, we were not in a mood for the consideration of food. What lay ahead of us occupied our thoughts. All through our travels there had been in the back of our consciousness the thought of the Great Pyramid and September 16, 1936, the eventful day prophesied by the Pyramid itself to have a tremendous future effect upon the races of mankind and our present civilization. Even as we hurriedly ate and glanced through a Cairo newspaper we observed that the press of that city had taken cognizance of September 16 and, in a long article, quoted different authorities’ interpretations of the symbolism of the Great Pyramid with respect to this particular day.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Sheikh Abdul, our personal guide, called for us in a modern automobile of American make in which we placed our various cinema equipment, tripod, camera, accessories, lens, films, filters, and then crowded ourselves in as well. We were soon speeding toward the Great Pyramids.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Of course, from what one has read and pictures one has seen, one realizes that the Pyramids are the greatest edifices ever built by ancient man—as far as we now have knowledge of the past—and that they are massive structures today, even in comparison with the skyscrapers and big buildings of our modem cities. But this realization is nothing to the actual experience of seeing them. As one approaches they grow monstrous and seem to loom out of the very sands upon which they are erected. Most paintings of the Great Pyramids make them seem very colorful, yet in the glaring sun, even in the early morning, to the eye they are white with just a slight tint of yellow. They reflect the brilliant sunlight on the sands.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The Pyramids are built on a great high plateau—the plateau of the Sahara. They are not in the Delta region of the Nile. In a sense, in their present state of preservation they appear crude, like an enormous pile of gigantic blocks tumbled upon each other and assuming, it seems, by accident the general shape of the Pyramid. But this impression is only gained when one is close to them. From a position close to them there seems to be little difference in size between the Great Pyramid of Cheops and the Pyramid of Chephren.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">As one starts to walk about the base of the Cheops Pyramid there soon dawns upon him the realization that it does, as estimated, cover an area of some thirteen acres. The great sandstone blocks of which it is composed are about the shoulder height of an average man. For a height of about fifty or sixty feet around the entire Pyramid, the great blocks are quite jagged and protrude. Above that, with the exception of the one corner or side of the Pyramid which is exposed toward the open desert, the sides are quite smooth and almost inaccessible. The exposed corner, however, has been whipped by the elements and the sands for years, and it is so jagged that its blocks form a natural stairway or steps to the apex. It would seem as though it would be quite simple to ascend the Pyramid by this means, yet to the inexperienced it is a tedious task. Native Arab boys for a few piastres willingly race to the top and return in the short time of seven minutes.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The top of the Great Pyramid is now flat, but originally is said to have had a gold apex, portions of which were removed at different intervals in the past. From below one can see a slender mast rising from the top. This steel mast, it is said, was affixed to the top of the Great Pyramid by Napoleon and from it flew the French flag during his occupation of Egypt.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">One of the mysteries of the Great Pyramid for a considerable time, even in late centuries, was the location of its entrance. There was nothing visible from the outside to indicate the proper entrance to it. The Caliph, El Mamoun, made a false entrance, and this false entrance is still used today as the main entrance to the Pyramid. It was through this false entrance that we made our entry, climbing up to it over two or three of the large blocks, each weighing two and a half tons, which is the average weight of all of them, and of which there are some two million, three hundred thousand in the Great Pyramid—enough to form a stone wall, four feet in height, from new York to San Francisco and half way back.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We entered the jagged aperture of the mammoth structure, and then our party of four cautiously walked along a semi-dark and narrow stone passageway which led to the ramp of what is known as the Grand Gallery. After walking along this passageway for a short distance we were obliged to stoop and crawl through a circular-like tunnel for a distance of about twenty five or thirty feet. When we stood erect again we were at the beginning of the Grand Gallery. It was a most awe-inspiring spectacle. We thrilled to the thought, as we looked upward along this steep narrow passageway and saw above us and on either side massive highly polished limestone blocks, that we were in the Great Pyramid of Egypt. Mystery of mysteries? One feels helpless, surrounded by this wall of stone. He feels insignificant; humble. It is peculiar but true that the Great Pyramid inspires in man that same feeling of humility as do some of the great works of nature. Slowly we began our ascent up the rough stone ridges which are in the form of steps, and which are the only means of reaching the top of the Grand Gallery. It is a steep ascent and you feel, after five or ten minutes of climbing, that the height of the Great Pyramid is under-estimated and certainly must exceed by several hundred feet the nearly five hundred feet accredited to it.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Suddenly your attention is called to an almost obscure hole-like aperture to your right as you ascend. As you look at it, it seems as though it was not an intentional opening but perhaps the result of dam age in later years, but you are advised that this is the true entrance to the Great Pyramid. As you peer into the inky blackness and feel a cool draft of air upon your face, you think of the hundreds of neophytes of the mystery schools of the past who were led up from the Chamber of Darkness below after taking their original obligation at the altar between the paws of the Sphinx and after having performed certain rites in the allegorical world of darkness depicted by the lower chamber. They were then permitted to ascend the very narrow and low passageway into which we looked and to enter the Great Pyramid itself through this jagged opening. How pleasing it must have been to them to know that they had attained that degree of illumination and understanding and worthiness which permitted them to travel further, physically, mentally and spiritually!</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">So with the most solemn spirit and in utter silence we proceeded. The entire experience invited silence. Ordinary conversation and comments would have seemed so absurd, so meaningless in contrast to the thought that was put into this stupendous structure, the wealth of knowledge it represented, the experience of those who had gone before us in this same place. Finally, with gratitude, we came to a rest at a level stage. Walking along this level pathway, which was considerably more narrow than the Grand Gallery, we entered a portal—an opening seemingly cut through a sheer block of limestone, of about seven feet in height and three feet in width. Passing through this we came into a large chamber known as the Queens Chamber, about twenty-five feet in length and sixteen or twenty feet in width, with a comparatively low ceiling, absolutely plain, no inscriptions, no symbolism, nothing to indicate either the life or death of its builders.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It must be explained at this point that the prophecies of the Great Pyramid are not based upon inscriptions found on the walls or in papyrus scrolls, for there was practically nothing left or found in the Great Pyramid to reveal anything of the times of the Pyramid itself or of the future which the Pyramid prophesies. The prognostications are based upon the dimensions and the arrangement of the dimensions of the Great Pyramid, its passageways, their height, length, and breadth, the height of the Pyramid, length and breadth of the stones, the distances from one passageway to another. There is a numerical uniformity to the dimensions, and this uniformity has given mathematicians, scientists and others a mathematical key, and with this key the different proportions and mathematical arrangements of the Great Pyramid have been used to reveal events of the future. This is not merely speculative or fantastic, because the events have definitely come to pass, one after another. It is one more indication of the fact that the Great Pyramid was used not only as a temple of learning but as a monument of learning to inform future generations of the knowledge of the basic sciences had by the mystery schools at that time.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Other facts are that the Pyramid is in the exact center of the land surface of the earth; the fact that the weight of the Pyramid is the same as the weight of the earth in proportion to its size; and further, that it was used as an astronomical observatory, showing knowledge of astronomy. Any engineer knows that the builders of the Great Pyramid must have been possessed of exceptional engineering skill and ingenuity to build the structure. Its great blocks of stone are perfectly mathematically proportioned. Their ends are fitted together so perfectly and held by such a thin and yet exceptionally adhesive mortar that not even a sheet of paper can be inserted between them. Chamber were hewn out so accurately that each block of stone does not vary from a straight line and an accurate cube more than a hundredth of an inch in a length of six feet.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">After leaving the Queens Chamber we returned to the Grand Gallery once again and continued our ascent for a few minutes longer. Except for the feeble torch-like lights every fifteen or twenty feet, fastened by metal brackets to the smooth stone sides in recent times, the passageway would have been inky black. Finally the uneven flooring, which really consists of stone blocks of which the Pyramid itself is built, with niches to keep one from slipping because of the steep incline, leveled out and a few feet ahead of us it appeared as though the passageway with the walls converging to a width of about four feet was blocked by a huge stone, one of the masonry blocks upended. As we approached it we noticed that (here had been carved through it also a tunnel-like passageway, the deeper shadow of the entrance not having been noticeable further back. The height of this tunnel-like passageway was not sufficient to allow us to walk erect and we were again obliged to crawl on hands and knees. We crawled a length of about sixteen feet, then stood upright in a large chamber, the height of which was about twelve or fourteen feet, length about thirty feet, width about twenty feet. This was the King’s Chamber, known as the Hall of Illumination. It too was perfectly bare of all furnishings, inscriptions, hieroglyphics,—in fact, everything with the exception that at the end opposite from which we entered was a large sarcophagus of stone. The sarcophagus, in fact, was one of the blocks of masonry of which the Great Pyramid is constructed, and it was lying in a horizontal position in the center of the end of the chamber. The upper portion of the block had been sawed or cut away, and the remainder had been hollowed out to conform to the general contour of the human body, and thus it formed the sarcophagus or coffin of some pharaoh or eminent person so relate the sagas. Many believe it was the burial place of the Pharaoh Cheops. However, there is nothing in the sarcophagus at this time, nothing inscribed upon it that would confirm this theory, and there never has been found anything that would definitely establish the fact that the Great Pyramid was built solely as a burial place, with this tomb-room as its final purpose. One immediately gains the impression, which supports legends that have come down through the ages as well as the more recent discoveries of which we will speak later, that this sarcophagus was used for initiation.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">In this Hall of Illumination, this King’s Chamber, there met at intervals only the highest adepts and the most highly developed and learned of the members of this mystery school, this early Egyptian Brotherhood of learning. It was in this King’s Chamber that the council meetings were held, where policies were decided upon which shaped the course of many human lives at that time. It was in this chamber that all the facts of reality, all the knowledge which man had acquired by virtue of experience and investigation, were classified and related and made into an understandable, livable philosophy of life. In the lower chambers the students were taught facts, the result of inquiry and investigation, made to prove the laws, made to apply them to their own lives, and as they learned these lessons they advanced, degree by degree, chamber by chamber, until eventually they were permitted to share in the council meetings of the Hall of Illumination, and from there they went forth in the world to spread the knowledge they had learned, to gather about them other neophytes whom they sought out and to teach them as they had been taught. All around this great temple of learning, this Pyramid, at that time greed, fear, avarice, ignorance and superstition prevailed. These dual conditions have always existed. The learned men of that time—those who had attained the Hall of Illumination—could not go out among the multitudes and immediately convert them to understanding. They would only have lost their lives if they had attempted it, and nothing would have been gamed.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">So the real purpose of the Great Pyramid was kept secret. To many at that time it was considered merely a place of worship where mysterious religious rites took place, and the ambassadors of light and wisdom of that period were forced to seek here and there one who was ready or worthy to take the vows at the altar between the paws of the Sphinx at a certain hour at night, and then be led through the secret passageway—discovered in recent time by Selim Hassan, eminent archaeologist, to have led into the Great Pyramid itself.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We stood about, none of us speaking, just thinking, each within the world of his own thoughts trying to visualize what had occurred in this very stone chamber, in this heart of a past civilization centuries ago. There also flashed through our minds the fact that many occult and mystical organizations, so proclaiming themselves, had prophesied a dire event for the world upon this very day, September 16, 1936. Chamber had contended that it meant, if not the end of the world, a serious catastrophe which would shatter civilization; that it would mean the ruination of humanity, or perhaps the very atoms of the Great Pyramid itself would fly asunder. We recalled, all of us, to ourselves, articles we had read within the last forty-eight hours in magazines, in newspapers, setting forth these prophecies by leaders of various sects and cults from every part of the world.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I recalled in particular some of the absurd articles I bad read not more than a month ago in various magazines issued by American and English occult societies, telling at length what was to take place on this day. The authors even went so far as to describe the King’s Chamber, just what it would look like at this time, as though something or other was going to change the appearance of this Hall of Illumination. Their description was fantastic imagination of the weirdest sort. Not one article that I had read accurately described the interior of these chambers. What the authors had written consisted of borrowed facts from other writings, which they distorted in order not to disclose that they had borrowed them. Each one of these schools of occultism professed to be perpetuating in some way or another some of the ancient rites or teachings of the ancient mystery schools of Egypt. Each also inferred that the world catastrophe which they told their readers w as to occur on this day would not affect the followers of their particular school or society, but rather give them some power or influence withheld from others. I further recalled reading an article by the leader of another occult society who declared that his society had been waiting weeks, months and years for this moment—it was the most sacred occasion for them—yet neither his nor one of the other organizations had a single representative within miles of the Great Pyramid on this eventful day.<span class="Italic-Basic"> The eyes of the world were on this Pyramid.</span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It gave me a sense of satisfaction that We had been chosen as representatives of the Ancient, Mystical Order Rosae Crucis, the authentic, world-wide Rosicrucian Order—the largest mystical order in the world with an authentic historical background, and which had its traditional origin in this ancient land—to be present in this Hall of Illumination on this September 16, 1936. We were, for AMORC, to see the fulfillment of a prophecy of the Great Pyramid. AMORC had long contended, based upon its heritage of knowledge which included truth about the prophecies of the Great Pyramid that this was not to be a day of disaster, ruination, and destruction, but the beginning of a world transition—a new era. There would be cycles of evolution and devolution again, the world would again know war, pestilence, poverty, and strife: but out of it all, within the next century, would come <span class="Italic-Basic">the greatest sincere understanding between nations and peoples</span>—the greatest world unity civilization had ever known. What greater faith could AMORC display in its ancient records than that we be here in this chamber, <span class="Italic-Basic">the very soul of the Great Pyramid</span>, at this fateful moment, when thousands, perhaps millions, elsewhere in other lands waited fearfully—for what? they did not know!</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">There was no feeling of depression, but a feeling of elation, of intense excitement, like the minute of lull before a great storm when the boughs of trees are motionless, when not even a leaf can be seen to move, when all nature seems in suspense, waiting for a signal to release her fury. This suspense did not instill fear, but rather expectancy that something stupendous of a Cosmic nature was taking place, or would, shortly.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It was then that there was performed a ceremony that none of us shall ever forget, and it was the first time that it had been performed since the days of the activity of the Great Pyramid itself—the time when the mystic brotherhoods held their regular ceremonies in it. I assumed the office of Master of the Temple. As if in one of our modern Rosicrucian lodges throughout the world, I directed by the motion of my hand where the others should be stationed in the chamber. I was here for the first time, in this incarnation at least, and fully cognizant of the import of the moment. Yet, it was with a strange ease that I proceeded with the brief arrangements for the ceremony—this initiation for that is what it truly became to me. Had I officiated here before? Had I been honored over 3000 years ago by being permitted to induct some other fratres or sorores into the highest degrees of the Order Rosae Crucis within these very stone walls? Had I once before been an instrument in this chamber, by which another attained the highest state of Illumination—Cosmic Consciousness? Perhaps I sensed a time in centuries past when my own eyes, for the first time, were permitted to rest upon the walls of this Sanctum Sanctorum. As I looked about me, I realized that the great stone blocks before, back, beneath, and above me were unchanged. The eyes of hundreds of ancient neophytes who struggled to attain, who studied and labored, and who evolved mentally and spiritually, had received identical visual impressions to mine in this chamber, for time had not altered its physical appearance. From where I stood the centuries fell away. There w as nothing more here to suggest the Twentieth Century than the Eighteenth, the First, or one 2000 B.C. A candidate of 1350 B.C. during the reign of our Illustrious Grand Master, Amenhotep IV, standing where I now stood, thirty centuries ago, would have been occupied with about the same thoughts as mine as he looked about. There was nothing here to suggest the era or the events occurring outside of this mass of masonry. Myriads of changes in civilization had taken place since these chambers first assumed their form, yet they still reflected the concept of their creators, resisting the influences of nature and man. Here, then, was a timeless, eternal environment in which all men found themselves in a like state of consciousness, regardless of temporal changes. A Hall of Illumination it truly was, for in the state of Cosmic Consciousness, which it depicted, all other things drop away or are absorbed as one.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">I next directed that each of us assume the symbolic positions of forming a Rosicrucian Lodge. This was accomplished by the manner in which we placed our hands in relation to our bodies and the position of our feet. We offered a silent prayer to the Cosmic, and then, in accordance with the time-honored Rosicrucian ritual performed here in ancient times, Frater Brower stepped forward for the intonation of the mystic vibratory vowel sounds. Standing with his back to the center of the great sarcophagus, symbol of earthly transition, he proceeded to intone the sacred vowels, the vibrations of which have a definite effect upon the emotional and psychic natures of man. The vibrations under ordinary circumstances are intended to, and do, excite these centers of man’s sympathetic nervous system and have a tendency to elevate his consciousness, to exhilarate him, transcend him above the ordinary mundane feelings and sensations which he experiences daily. But none of us expected the result. We heard, not alone Frater Brower’s intonations, but it seemed the chorus of a million voices besides. With the very utterance of the first vowel it seemed as though he had struck a key which unlocked voices that had been imprisoned in stone for centuries awaiting a magic word or tone for release, and the sounds came back to us from the walls and the floor and the ceiling like a chorus of cries of freedom, as though we had liberated imprisoned beings. It was startling. He continued the vowel sounds for a period of at least five minutes. We seemed to sway. We lost sense of time and space. We were swept along with this strange current of psychic emotionalism, and it seemed that for several minutes (it must have been just seconds) after he ceased his intonation the sounds continued to reverberate from wall, ceiling and floor. Then all was quiet; the silence was deeper and more obvious by contrast than it bad been before.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We felt rejuvenated. Fatigue from the ascent was gone. Any fear that any of us may have had with respect to the stories of what was to occur in the Great Pyramid seemed absurd to us now. We felt secure, and a sense of contentment and peace came over us as though, unwittingly, we had accomplished a great good, which we may come to realize in this lifetime or we may not.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Our guide was waiting for us outside the low circular passageway. As we started through it, he begged me to stop in the middle of the passageway in my crouched position until he crawled through, reaching me. We could not pass each other. He looked into my face from this position on his hands and knees and said, “At this particular point where you are you can safely arise and stand erect.” I twisted my head into a position so that I could look above, and there to my surprise immediately above me was a small shaft just large enough to accommodate my body. I moved into position so that as I arose the upper portion of my body would rise into the shaft overhead. It was inky black, because I could not then see the light of the circular passageway in which I stood. It was as though I had a hood of stone over my head. He said, “Reach above you with your right hand as far as you can.” I brought my right hand up close to my body until I eventually stretched it far above my head. He said, “Now place your hand against the stone wall immediately in front of you.” This I did. He continued, “Now, move your hand until you feel a projection of stone, about the size of your hand.” I moved my hand slowly against the cold, smooth, stone surface until it struck against an oblong projection. He said, Place your hand upon it. I did. I noticed that it fitted my hand as though it had been shaped to be held in a closed hand like something that was intended to be carried by the hand. I pulled against it to see if it was loose. I commented on this. He explained. What you feel has been shaped out of the stone block of which it is a part. The block has been cut away from the raised portion. Your hand now rests on the exact center of the Great Pyramid. It is the mathematical center. The distance from the point of your hand to the apex of the Pyramid and to the base and to the various sides is exactly the same. Furthermore, you are now grasping what is known as the <span class="Italic-Basic">Pyramidal inch</span>. That stone, that particular size, was the unit of measurement used by the Egyptians in building this very edifice, and to commemorate that unit of measurement it was carved on the side of one of the blocks of the Pyramid and placed in the exact center where it now rests.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">What master mathematicians, what genius in a time and an age when the world likes to think of mankind having dwelt in utter ignorance! With a feeling akin to reverence, I rejoined the party, and soon we had left the coolness of the Great Pyramid with its constant temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit for the now blistering desert outside. This temperature of the Great Pyramid is what is recommended by air conditioning engineers today as the ideal temperature for human comfort. Is it coincidence or did the genius of the Pyramid builders foresee it?</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">The party then returned to Cairo with the exception of Frater Brower and myself. We proceeded to locate one of the huge exterior blocks of stone of the Pyramid, in the shade, and there we sat and ate our lunch overlooking the plateau of the Sahara Desert and the green Nile and Delta; also looking down toward the mud huts on the site of the old city of Gizeh.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">Early in the afternoon we sought out the recent excavations of that eminent archaeologist, Selim Hassan. We climbed down and through the Pyramid Temple. This Temple was quite some distance from the Great Pyramid itself, and originally was connected with it by a long ramp or causeway. Many preliminary ceremonies were held in this Temple, and then from there the participants, candidates, and neophytes, in a picturesque procession walked along these ramps and causeways to the Great Pyramid and concluded their rites. Just recently, in this Pyramid Temple, there was excavated the sarcophagus and mummy of a princess, a daughter of Cheops. We photographed hundreds of feet of film of the more recent excavations of the Sphinx, showing how the paws were not hewn out of a promontory of stone as is the upper portion of the body, but consisted of flat stones about four inches in thickness, laid one upon the other, forming layers, and then shaped as we now see them. We commented upon the great crime committed by Napoleon when he ordered his men to fire upon the Sphinx, defacing it, to show his disrespect for the Egyptians veneration of it.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">After filming with professional cameras, by special permission from the Egyptian government, many other structures in and around the Great Pyramid, we went closer to examine and photograph with still camera the colonnaded court or entrance to a newly excavated temple, at the base of the Pyramid. Of a different type stone than the Pyramid itself, it seemed marble like against the background. We commented upon the fact that this very ancient structure had Doric-like columns, the architectural form credited to the much later Grecian period. We were to discover, however, that the Egyptians used this type of column quite commonly, and it is still believed by some archaeologists that there is no connection between the Doric column and the column to which we have referred.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">It was late in the day when we prepared for our return. We departed by camels to where the roads began and again loaded our equipment into a modern motor car. We looked up at the Great Pyramid. It had changed. It was now colorful. The setting sun had given it a golden glow. Its ragged contour, caused by the exposed blocks of masonry, cast patches of deep shadow, purple in hue. The shadows seemed to be creeping from the desert itself, rapidly approaching, soon to engulf it in darkness.</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph">We retired to our hotel early, for tomorrow the Nile was to reveal another chapter of civilization’s tale. Each mile almost, as one travels along that great river, one has unfolded to him a story of man’s past accomplishments, glory, power, failure, hopes and misfortunes. Therefore we now looked forward to Luxor, or the ancient city of Thebes, once glorious capital of Egypt when in all her power and splendor.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
